REVIEW
Diseases in tropical and plantation crops as affected by
climate changes: current knowledge and perspectives
R. Ghini*, W. Bettiol and E. Hamada
Embrapa Environment, CP69, CEP 13820-000 Jaguariu´na, SP, Brazil
Tropical and plantation crops include important crops for food security and alternative energy resources. Even so, there are
few studies on the impact of climate change on diseases of thesecrops. Findings from previous studies concerning some cli-
mate-change effects on diseases of coffee,sugarcane, eucalyptus, cassava, citrus, banana, pineapple, cashew, coconut and
papaya have been summarized to provide a context. By revi ewing available methods to evaluate the impact of climate
change on diseases of tropical and plantation crops, we present trends for some diseases and their management strategies,
identify critical gaps in knowledge, and suggest experimentaland analytical approaches to advance knowledge. As the pro-
jected climate conditions will probably vary greatly in the future from continent to continent and from developed to develop-
ing countries, studies must be conducted under tropical regi ons considering their speciﬁc environmental conditions.
Multifactor studies under realistic ﬁeld situations, such as free air CO2 enrichment with increasing CO2 and O3 concentra-
tions incorporating spectral reﬂectance measuresin situ for realistic assessment of plant growth, are a way forward. Effects
of a changing climate on chemical and biological controls are discussed in the context of changing global outlook on envi-
ronmental demands for the future.
Keywords: atmospheric CO 2 and O 3 concentration, crop management strategies, FACE facilities, open top cham-
bers, tropical plant diseases
Introduction
Potential effects of climate change on agriculture, accord-
ing to the IPCC (Solomon et al., 2007), include reduced
yields in warmer regions as a result of heat stress; damage
to crops, soil erosion and inability to cultivate land
caused by heavy precipitation events; and land degrada-
tion resulting from increasing drought. Crop simulation
models, driven by future climate scenarios from global
circulation models, suggest that the reduction in agricul-
tural production would be more severe in tropical
regions, where there is still a shortage of food production
(Cerri et al., 2007).
Certainly, the increased frequency of extreme weather
events will result in the increased importance of abiotic
stresses under future climate. With respect to biotic stres-
ses, few studies have been done on the impact of climate
change on diseases of tropical and plantation crops,
despite coffee, sugarcane, eucalyptus, rubber, oil palm,
cassava, coconut, citrus and other fruits being important
tropical crops for domestic consumption and export
earnings. Diseases are responsible for losses of at least
10% of global food production, representing a threat to
food security (Strange & Scott, 2005). Agrios (2005) esti-
mated that annual losses by disease cost $220 billion and
stated that to these should be added 6–12% losses of
crops after harvest, which are particularly high in devel-
oping tropical countries lacking infrastructure. Besides
direct losses, the methods for disease control – especially
the chemical methods – can result in environmental con-
tamination and in residual chemicals in food, in addition
to social and economic problems.
Climate change will increase uncertainty in the produc-
tion of many crops in tropical countries, including many
developing countries where these crops may form an
important basis of the gross domestic product. For exam-
ple, Gay et al. (2006) veriﬁed that the projected climate-
change conditions for the year 2020 indicate that coffee
production in Veracruz (Mexico) might not be economi-
cally viable for producers, since the model indicates a
reduction of 34% of the current production. For Brazil,
according to Assad et al. (2004), a reduction in suitable
coffee-growing areas greater than 95% is expected in
Goia´ s, Minas Gerais and Sa ˜ o Paulo States, and about*E-mail: raquel@cnpma.embrapa.br
122
ª 2011 The Authors
Plant Pathology ª 2011 BSPP
Plant Pathology (2011) 60, 122–132 Doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3059.2010.02403.x

75% in Parana´ State in the case of a temperature increase
of 5 Æ8/C176 C. Any disruption to production caused by plant
diseases will impact on the economy and society, with
far-reaching implications beyond simple production
losses. Coffee leaf rust, caused by Hemileia vastatrix ,i s
considered the main disease of the crop, as it is estimated
that disease losses, in the absence of effective control mea-
sures, can amount to 30% of production (Kushalappa &
Eskes, 1989; Zambolim et al., 1999). In South America,
production of green coffee was almost 4 million tonnes in
2008 (FAO, 2010), constituting an important export
product in several countries. Analysis of the potential
impact of climate change on coffee leaf rust is essential
for the adoption of adaptation measures, in order to
avoid more serious losses. The limited information avail-
able on climate-change impact on tropical crops and
future projections are mostly based on modelling studies.
Little empirical knowledge necessary for the develop-
ment of adaptation strategies is available.
In general, long-term datasets are particularly rare in
relation to tropical and plantation crop diseases, which
are a prerequisite for ﬁnding ﬁngerprints of inter-annual
climatic variation on plant diseases (Jeger & Pautasso,
2008), making it difﬁcult to check if changes are already
occurring.
A discussion of the potential impact of climate change
on plant diseases of economic signiﬁcance in Australia,
including sugarcane and eucalyptus diseases, was pub-
lished by Chakraborty et al. (1998). Ghini & Hamada
(2008) edited a book discussing the impact of climate
change on diseases of the main crops in Brazil, including
important diseases of the tropical region. Given the lim-
ited empirical data, the purpose of the present review is to
discuss experimental approaches available for evaluating
the impact of climate change on diseases of tropical and
plantation crops, present the trends and management
strategies for some diseases, identify critical gaps in
knowledge and suggest experimental and analytical
approaches to advance knowledge.
Experimental approaches
Understanding and predicting climate-change impact in
crops requires approaches involving experimental
manipulation of temperature, precipitation, CO
2 and O3.
A multifactor approach mimics the way climate change
alters agroecosystems, allowing realistic impact assess-
ment. Nevertheless, multifactor studies of climate-
change effects have never been done with tropical and
plantation crop diseases. There are some examples of
studies dealing with more than one factor, mostly in con-
trolled environments, for diseases of annual crops (Tiede-
mann & Firsching, 2000; Plessl et al., 2007) and in free to
air CO
2 enrichment (FACE) facilities for forestry species
(Karnosky et al., 2002), but temperature has been a difﬁ-
cult parameter to control in ﬁeld studies. Mikkelsen et al.
(2008) discussed the design and functionality of multifac-
torial experiments with particular focus on interactions
and artefacts related to the combined treatments. The
experimental design of a multifactor climate-change
experiment with elevated CO
2, warming and drought at
Brandbjerg, Denmark, described by the authors, conﬁrms
that it is difﬁcult to reach the target temperature. Experi-
mental studies of the long-term effects of increased CO
2
and O 3 concentrations on tropical and plantation crops
in more realistic ﬁeld settings have not yet been done on a
comprehensive scale. The general rule that high concen-
tration of atmospheric CO 2 results in higher yield and
plant development is not always applicable to these
crops. Trials conducted by Gleadow et al. (2009) demon-
strated that total cassava biomass and edible-tuber yield
decreased linearly with rising atmospheric CO
2 concentra-
tion, probably as a result of lower photosynthetic capacity
caused by stomata exceptionally sensitive to CO2.
Despite general evidence of beneﬁcial effects of CO2 on
the host plant, it is not well known if these effects will still
take place in the presence of pathogens or other limiting
factors, particularly in tropical countries. Studies under
controlled conditions might not reﬂect plant responses in
the ﬁeld, where there are variations and interactions
among temperature, precipitation and other variables.
FACE and open-top chambers (OTCs) offer more realis-
tic options to understand how rising atmospheric compo-
sition of CO
2 and O 3 can inﬂuence host–pathogen
interaction, disease severity and management of tropical
and plantation crops. There are several OTC (Bortier
et al. , 2000; Riikonen et al. , 2008) and FACE facilities
worldwide, ranging from annual crops to forestry spe-
cies, and some of these have dealt with plant diseases
(Percy et al., 2002; Mitchell et al., 2003; Eastburn et al.,
2010). Recently, Ainsworth & Long (2005), Erbs & Fan-
gmeier (2006) and Chakraborty et al. (2008) have
reviewed and summarized FACE research in several
FACE facilities. However, among the FACE and OTC
studies described by them, none were with tropical or
plantation crops.
The OTCs designed for temperate climate are not sui-
ted to tropical regions, because they alter the microcli-
mate within an OTC. The temperature reached inside the
OTC, in tropical situations is much higher than ambient
conditions when compared with temperate situations,
causing signiﬁcant changes in the microenvironment.
Light intensity is particularly diminished, wind velocity is
lower and relative humidity is higher (Lessin & Ghini,
2009). New OTC designs and environmental control sys-
tems are necessary to address the requirements of tropical
plant pathosystems.
A FACE facility is under construction in Brazil to study
the effects of increased CO
2 concentration on coffee dis-
eases, pests and weeds, as well as plant physiology and
other related organisms (Climapest project, website:
http://www.macroprograma1.cnptia.embrapa.br/clima
pest). Six 10-m-diameter elevated CO
2 rings have been
constructed, each with separated controllers that measure
CO
2 concentration, air humidity and temperature, pre-
cipitation, wind speed and direction, barometric pres-
sure, soil temperature and humidity. The system
instrumentation is based on wireless sensor network
Climate change and diseases of tropical and plantation crops 123
Plant Pathology (2011) 60, 122–132
 13653059, 2011, 1, Downloaded from https://bsppjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2010.02403.x, Wiley Online Library on [26/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

technology. Environmental sensors have been adapted to
ZigBee modules. The wireless sensor network-based
instrumentation will facilitate system installation and
maintenance, and will increase its portability. The experi-
mental site is situated at Jaguariu´ na, Sa˜ o Paulo State (lati-
tude 22 /C176 14¢10¢¢S, longitude 46 /C176 59¢09¢¢W, 570 m a.s.l.).
The coffee plantation that includes the experimental plots
is 7 ha in size. The Climapest FACE aims to study the
individual and combined effects of high CO
2 concentra-
tion, water and N supply. To evaluate the impact of
increased CO2 concentration on plant diseases, pests and
weeds in forest species, apple, peach, soybean, grape,
corn, cotton, castor beans, forage crops, coffee, cassava
and banana, the Climapest project is installing six mini-
FACE facilities throughout the country (Bele ´m, Para´
State; Petrolina, Pernambuco State; Sete Lagoas, Minas
Gerais State; Londrina, Parana ´ State; Jaguariu´ na, Sa˜ o
Paulo State; and Vacaria, Rio Grande do Sul State).
Both the fabrication of facilities and the running of
long-term FACE studies on tropical and plantation crops
are expensive because of plant height, high temperatures
promoting greater loss of gases and increased cost of
monitoring equipment. These problems may present
impediments to the establishment of new FACE facilities
in tropical regions. Ainsworth et al. (2008) stated that the
major limiting factor for FACE is the cost of the large
quantities of CO
2 that are released, which varies dramati-
cally between FACE experiments, depending on the ﬁnal
concentration of CO2, source of CO 2, plot volume fumi-
gated, wind speed and uniformity of the vegetation.
These authors proposed a new generation of large-scale
and low-cost FACE experiments. For example, the use of
gradients of each climate variable is important to obtain
more accurate models of disease development, instead of
discrete levels (Chakraborty et al., 2008).
Pritchard & Amthor (2005) discussed the beneﬁts and
limitations of different methods of studying effects of
environmental change on crops. Each method of experi-
mentally controlling environmental conditions has
advantages and disadvantages. Under controlled condi-
tions, superior control of temperature, humidity, gas con-
centrations and other variables can be reached. However,
studies conducted in controlled conditions might not
reﬂect plant responses in the ﬁeld, where there are varia-
tions and interactions among temperature, precipitation
and other factors. Light levels, for example, are often low
inside chambers and the spectral quality usually differs
from that of the sun. Despite these limitations, controlled
conditions are useful for evaluating epidemiological
parameters, changes in aggressiveness of pathogen popu-
lations (Chakraborty & Datta, 2003) and plant physiol-
ogy. A particular approach is the European Ecotron,
which is a closed controlled-environment facility dedi-
cated to the study of ecosystems and organisms under cur-
rent and future environmental changes. There is a set of
three experimental facilities housing a series of conﬁne-
ment units on a large (macrocosm), medium (mesocosm)
or small scale (microcosm), allowing a range of high
quality simultaneous environmental simulations, with
high quality measurements. The purpose is to keep the
conditions as realistic as possible by working with natural
light, intact soil monoliths, large samples of ecosystems
and with in situ reference measurements.
Studies on the effects of CO
2 and O 3 should be per-
formed with methods that allow changes only in the tar-
get variable, whilst others remain constant. These studies
become difﬁcult because of the inability to create an envi-
ronment free from artefacts and equipment necessary to
expose the plant to the target gas to be tested. The search
for more realistic conditions has led to the use of OTC
and FACE experiments. The OTCs can be used for studies
with increased concentrations of CO
2 and O3 because of
the ability to conduct trials at all stages of plant develop-
ment, with less interference from the structures, except
for the reduction of solar radiation and the increase in
temperature caused by the plastic. Plants can be grown
directly in soil, which is an advantage compared with pot
trials. Studies in pots should be avoided because they may
limit of root growth and change the soil structure. More-
over, using OTCs it is possible to obtain responses to the
gas in natural conditions, including daily ﬂuctuations and
seasonal climate. However, FACE experiments allow
more natural conditions, because of the release of CO
2
and O3 under ﬁeld conditions.
In addition to the high cost of establishing FACE and
OTC facilities, assessing and measuring disease severity
and other pathogen-related traits in large plant canopies
of tropical and plantation crops is another factor limiting
research in this area. Remote sensing has been useful for
monitoring areas planted to speciﬁc crops, for detecting
plant diseases and insect infestations, and for contribut-
ing to accurate crop production forecasts (Campbell,
2007). Factors of plant stress, such as insufﬁcient water
or nutrients, adverse climatic conditions, plant diseases,
and insect damage on crops, cause physiological and
morphological changes within plants; and these factors
can be associated with the spectral behaviour of the
plants. For example, plant pathogens may alter leaf col-
our by causing chemical changes within plant cells or by
growing on plant surfaces; and insects and pathogens can
change morphological characteristics by ingesting or
detaching plant material (Jackson, 1986).
Remote sensing applications rely on knowledge of the
spectral properties of individual leaves and plants above a
background of soil and plant litter, and this information,
often termed ‘ground truth’ is acquired in situ, which for
plant diseases relies on plant pathology expertise. Field
measurements are obtained by a ﬁeld spectroradiometer
which is a unit consisting of an array of photosensitive
detectors, with ﬁlters or a diffraction grating to separate
radiation into several spectral regions, and this procedure
is called ground-based radiometry.
One of the earliest studies examining the spectral
responses of a diseased crop is credited to Colwell (1956),
and since then other research has been conducted by
adopting ground-based radiometry, for example, with
Maize dwarf mosaic virus-infected andHelminthosporium
maydis-infected corn leaves (Ausmus & Hilty, 1972);
124 R. Ghini et al.
Plant Pathology (2011) 60, 122–132
 13653059, 2011, 1, Downloaded from https://bsppjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2010.02403.x, Wiley Online Library on [26/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

barley infected by cereal powdery mildew (Lorenzen &
Jensen, 1989); leaf spectral reﬂectance for powdery mil-
dew disease in golden euonymus (Carter, 1993); bean
infected by Botrytis fabae (Malthus & Madeira, 1993);
and powdery mildew and take-all disease in wheat
(Graeff et al. , 2006). Studies relating the spectral
responses of diseased crop canopies with ground-based
radiometry are essential as a scientiﬁc base to the use of
satellite multispectral scanner data to detect and monitor
plant disease.
The use of hyperspectral data and hyperspectral ana-
lytical approaches have increased in the past decade, with
technological advances in aircraft-borne sensors and
satellite remote sensing. Hamid Muhammed & Larsolle
(2003) used the whole spectrum in the objective examina-
tion of how different parts of it contribute in describing
disease severity in wheat with hyperspectral reﬂectance
measures, processing them using independent component
analysis and principal component analysis. Blackburn
(2007) proposed the use of hyperspectral data combined
with light detection and ranging (lidar) remote sensing
for quantifying chlorophyll pigments of plants. Accord-
ing to Osama et al. (2007), numerous studies have shown
the applicability of lidar-based remote sensing to estimate
plant properties such as canopy height, canopy structure,
carbon stock, and species; and several studies have also
demonstrated the usefulness of lidar in assessing large-
scale plant growth responses. However, the potential of
3D lidar has not yet been fully exploited for monitoring
plant responses to stress, including plant diseases and
insect damage on crops. Under the forecasted conditions
of climate change, i.e. the enrichment of CO
2 and O 3
atmospheric concentrations, higher temperature and
water stress, new interactions between plants and their
environment could occur and the host–pathogen interac-
tion could be altered, with consequent changes in the
spectral properties of the plant.
Potential impact of climate change on
tropical and plantation crop diseases
A limited number of studies have considered the potential
impact of climate change on diseases and pests of tropical
and plantation crops. Much of the literature deals with
modelling approaches to determine how the distribution
of a particular disease⁄ pest may change under a future cli-
mate scenario and only a handful have used experimental
approaches (Ghini & Hamada, 2008; Ghini et al. ,
2008a). The effects of elevated CO
2 and ⁄ or O 3 have
rarely been included in these assessments.
Deutsch et al. (2008) integrated empirical ﬁtness curves
describing the thermal tolerance of terrestrial insects with
the projected geographic distribution of climate change
for the next century to estimate the direct impact of
warming on insect ﬁtness across latitudes. The authors
observed that warming in the tropics, although relatively
small in magnitude, is likely to have the most deleterious
consequences because tropical insects are relatively sensi-
tive to temperature change and are currently living very
close to their optimal temperature. In contrast, species at
higher latitudes have broader thermal tolerance and are
living in climates that are currently cooler than their phys-
iological optima, so that warming may even enhance their
ﬁtness. Thus, it was concluded that the greatest extinction
risks from global warming may be in the tropics. This is
particularly important for viruses transmitted by insect
vectors, such as Pineapple mealybug wilt-associated
virus, transmitted by Dysmicoccus brevipes and D. neo-
brevipes (Sether et al. , 2001, 2005); Papaya ringspot
virus (PRSV-P), transmitted by different species of aphid
(Rezende & Martins, 2005); and Citrus leprosis virus,
transmitted by Brevipalpus phoenicis (Feichtenberger
et al. , 2005). A reduction in vector population may
decrease the importance of some viruses in tropical
regions.
A modelling approach has been used to determine the
potential impact of climate change on the most important
diseases of coffee, sugarcane, eucalyptus, cassava, citrus,
banana, pineapple, cashew, coconut, mango and papaya,
employing detailed knowledge of environmental condi-
tions favourable for disease development and predicted
climate change projected for the next several decades.
In coffee, the potential impact of climate change on the
spatial distribution of the coffee nematode (races of
Meloidogyne incognita ) and leaf miner ( Leucoptera
coffeella) in Brazil was determined using a geographic
information system (Ghini et al., 2008b). Future scenar-
ios focused on the 2020s, 2050s and 2080s [IPCC scenar-
ios A2 and B2 (Nakicenovic & Swart, 2000)] were
obtained from ﬁve General Circulation Models, available
from the Data Distribution Centre of Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (http://www.ipcc-data.org/
sres/gcm_data.html; Watson, 2001). Geographic distri-
bution maps were prepared using models to predict the
number of generations of the two pests. Maps obtained
for scenario A2 projected an increased infestation of the
nematode and of the insect pest as a result of a greater
number of generations per month than occurred during
1961–1990. The number of generations also increased in
the B2 scenario, but the magnitude was lower than in the
A2 scenario for both organisms.
Coffee leaf rust, caused by H. vastatrix , is the most
destructive disease of coffee in all tropical regions (Ku-
shalappa & Eskes, 1989; Zambolim et al. , 1999). The
fungus attacks all commercial coffee cultivars, causing
premature drop of infected leaves and reduced yield.
Besides rainfall and temperature, the severity of coffee
leaf rust is inﬂuenced by the amount of initial inoculum
and the capacity of cultivars to shed infected leaves (Berg-
amin Filho et al. , 1990). In Brazilian conditions, Chal-
foun et al. (2001) observed changes in the annual date of
the ﬁrst reported occurrence of coffee rust, compared to
what had been observed during the 1980s and 1990s. Pos-
sibly, these results were related to the increase in mini-
mum average temperature during the winter, extending
the sporulation period for the pathogen to September–
October. The effect of elevated atmospheric CO
2
concentration on the latent period of coffee leaf rust was
Climate change and diseases of tropical and plantation crops 125
Plant Pathology (2011) 60, 122–132
 13653059, 2011, 1, Downloaded from https://bsppjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2010.02403.x, Wiley Online Library on [26/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

evaluated by Mendes (2009). Coffee seedlings were
grown at concentrations of 400, 500, 700 and 900 p.p.m.
CO
2 and inoculated with urediniospores of the pathogen
under controlled conditions (22 /C176 C and 100% relative
humidity). The average latent period of coffee leaf rust
was 36 Æ4 days at 400 p.p.m., reduced to 21 Æ2, 21 Æ4 and
18Æ7 days at 500, 700 and 900 p.p.m. CO2, respectively.
According to Sanguino (2008), the importance of dis-
eases that affect sugarcane, such as smut ( Ustilago sci-
taminea), Sugarcane mosaic virus (SCMV), leaf scald
disease ( Xanthomonas albilineans ) and ratoon stunting
disease (Leifsonia xyli subsp. xyli), can be changed only
by direct human interference. Climate change is unlikely
to affect the importance of these diseases. As these dis-
eases are systemic, their main means of spreading is by the
use of infected material for vegetative propagation, or by
infected cutting instruments. However, according to
Chakraborty et al. (1998), diseases such as leaf scald may
undergo increased spread via severe storms and cyclones.
Pineapple disease of sugarcane, caused by Ceratocystis
paradoxa, will probably be reduced in signiﬁcance as it is
favoured by low soil temperatures (Chakraborty et al. ,
1998).
Booth et al. (2000) performed a risk analysis for the
occurrence of Cylindrocladium quinqueseptatum ,a n
important causal agent of leaf blight in eucalyptus in sev-
eral production regions in the world. The authors also
used some simple climate-change scenarios to suggest
areas in mainland South East Asia which may become
vulnerable to C. quinqueseptatum over the next 50 years.
Moraes et al. (2008) studied the potential impact of cli-
matic change on eucalyptus rust disease (Puccinia psidii),
elaborating distribution maps of the disease under sce-
narios A2 and B2. The maps showed that there will be a
reduction of the favourable area in Brazil. Considering
the environmental conditions for the pathogen, such a
reduction will be gradual for the decades of 2020, 2050
and 2080, mainly in warm regions.
The nursery diseases caused by Ralstonia solanacea-
rum, Xanthomonas sp. and Quambalaria eucalypti
should remain the most important diseases in the future
for eucalyptus, because they are favoured by high temper-
atures (Alfenas et al., 2004). Under ﬁeld conditions, dis-
eases caused by Ceratocystis ﬁmbriata, Cylindrocladium
sp., R. solanacearum and Xanthomonas sp. will require
special attention because they are also favoured by high
temperatures and the pathogens are aggressive. Further-
more, secondary pathogens will have a greater chance of
causing losses, mainly through plant stress, caused by
changes in temperature and precipitation, especially
because resistant genetic material is not being selected to
control these pathogens. Among the factors responsible
for the increased importance of secondary diseases, there
is increased plant predisposition to unfavourable climate
conditions (R. G. Maﬁa, A. C. Alfenas and R. A. Loss,
Aracruz Celulose and Vic¸osa University, Brazil, personal
communication).
Bacterial blight caused by Xanthomonas axonopodis
pv. manihotis is the most important disease of cassava
(Manihot esculenta ), limiting production and causing
losses of 50–100% in susceptible cultivars, compared
with only 5–7% in resistant cultivars (Verdier, 2002;
Massola Jr & Bedendo, 2005). In regions where the cur-
rent temperature is above the bacterium’s optimum tem-
perature (22–26 /C176 C, according to Verdier, 2002), the
importance of the disease will tend to remain similar or
lower because rising projected temperatures will be unfa-
vourable to it. For regions where current temperature is
below the optimum, the increase in temperature will
favour the occurrence of epidemics.
The Brazilian citrus industry is the largest among the
tropical countries and the state of Sa˜ o Paulo accounts for
83% of the country’s production. Jesus Ju
´ nior et al.
(2008a) analysed the impact of climate change on citrus
diseases in Sa˜ o Paulo State and predicted that for citrus
variegated chlorosis caused by Xylella fastidiosa , under
future scenarios of climate change for the central and
southern regions of Brazil, the production of shoots in
spring and summer would increase, increasing the popu-
lation of leafhoppers ( Dilobopterus costalimai , Onco-
metopia facialis and Acrogonia sp.), considered the main
vectors of the bacterium (Milanez et al., 2002) and conse-
quently the incidence of the disease. Symptoms of dis-
eased plants may be aggravated by increased temperature
and period of water deﬁcit. With rising temperatures,
there should also be a change in the abundance of leaf-
hoppers. Citrus huanglongbing (= greening; ‘Candidatus
Liberibacter’ spp.) can also show an increase in intensity
under more favourable conditions for the vector ( Di-
aphorina citri ). The projected reduction in precipitation
in this region could stimulate the early development of
the mite population ( Brevipalpus phoenicis ) and conse-
quently increase the viral disease, citrus leprosis. How-
ever, extreme drought events can reduce the mite
population. Jesus Ju´ nior et al. (2008a) concluded that the
importance of citrus black spot ( Guignardia citricarpa )
and ﬂoral rot ( Colletotrichum acutatum ) could increase
with rising temperatures.
Black Sigatoka (Mycosphaerella ﬁjiensis) is considered
the most damaging and costly disease of banana in the
world (Ploetz et al., 2003). Ghini et al. (2007) studied the
potential impact of climatic change on black Sigatoka by
using IPCC scenarios A2 and B2 to project distribution
maps of the disease. The maps projected a reduction of
the favourable area to the disease in Brazil resulting from
a reduction in relative humidity to levels below 70%.
Such reduction will be gradual for the 2020s, 2050s and
2080s and will be greater for scenario A2 than for B2.
Despite this, extensive areas will remain favourable to
this disease, especially from November to April, which is
currently the most favourable period. Jesus Ju ´ nior et al.
(2008b) used the IPCC scenarios and classiﬁed areas as
highly favourable, favourable, relatively favourable, little
favourable and unfavourable to develop maps represent-
ing future worldwide spatial distribution of black Siga-
toka. The predictions suggested the same results obtained
by Ghini et al. (2007), i.e. in the future, favourable areas
for the development of the disease will decrease. Panama
126 R. Ghini et al.
Plant Pathology (2011) 60, 122–132
 13653059, 2011, 1, Downloaded from https://bsppjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2010.02403.x, Wiley Online Library on [26/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

disease ( Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. cubense) is another
important disease which is prevalent in most banana-
growing regions (Ploetz et al. , 2003). In contrast to the
black Sigatoka story, Gasparotto & Pereira (2008) sug-
gested that the importance of Panama disease will
increase with climate change, explaining that rising tem-
peratures and periods of drought will alter plant physi-
ology, causing stress, and possibly increasing the
aggressiveness of F. oxysporum f. sp. cubense in suscep-
tible cultivars.
Pineapple fusariosis, caused by Fusarium subglutinans
f. sp. ananas, may be reduced in signiﬁcance by increased
temperatures. This observation is based on the work of
Matos et al. (2000), who reported a reduction in the inci-
dence of Fusarium when the temperature exceeded 35 /C176 C
and rainfall decreased. The importance of pineapple
mealybug wilt, caused by the complex called Pineapple
mealybug wilt-associated virus (PMWaV-1, PMWaV-2
and PMWaV-3), transmitted and spread by D. brevipes
and D. neobrevipes (Sether et al. , 2001, 2005), on the
other hand, may increase because the vectors could be
stimulated by rising temperatures. PMWaV is wide-
spread in all pineapple-producing areas (Sanches et al. ,
2000).
Climate change will favour the occurrence of epidem-
ics of cashew (Anacardium occidentale) powdery mildew
(Oidium anacardii), both in Africa and Brazil, where cur-
rently they are of secondary importance (Freire et al. ,
2002; Adejumo, 2005). Epidemics of anthracnose ( Col-
letotrichum gloeosporioides and Colletotrichum acuta-
tum), which is the most important disease of cashew in
Brazil, will be more frequent under the IPCC future cli-
mate scenarios for Brazil (Hamada et al. , 2008). Rela-
tively major changes in the incidence of anthracnose,
black mould (Pilgeriella anacardii) and powdery mildew
of cashew with droughts during 2005 and 2006, and
excessive rainfall in 2008 and 2009, suggests that these
diseases may be easily inﬂuenced by a changing climate
(J. E. Cardoso and F. M. P. Viana, Embrapa Tropical Agr-
oindustry, Brazil, personal communication).
Climate change will reduce the importance of black
leaf spot ( Camarotella torrendiella and Camarotella
acrocomiae), phytomonas wilt ( Phytomonas sp.), blight
and leaf spots ( Bipolaris incurvata ) and heart rot
(Phytophthora spp.), but not of leaf blight (Botryosphae-
ria cocogena) of coconut palm ( Cocos nucifera) in Brazil
(D. R. N. Warwick, V. Talamini, R. R. C. Carvalho and
A. M. F. Silva, Embrapa Coastal Tablelands, Brazil, per-
sonal communication). Again, these assessments are pro-
jected based on observed effects of reduced precipitation
and increased temperature.
Papaya ringspot virus (PRSV-P) is transmitted by dif-
ferent species of aphid. It is estimated that the damage
caused by this disease will increase in severity with the
expected increase in temperature. Mangrauthia et al.
(2009) observed that at temperatures between 26 and
31/C176 C symptoms were more severe. Jesus Ju ´ nior et al.
(2007) evaluated the impact of climate change on leaf
lesions ( Asperisporium caricae ) of papaya in Brazil and
found that in the future, there will be a reduction in the
area favourable to this disease. However, the authors
point out that large areas will still be favourable to it, par-
ticularly in Espirito Santo State, a leading producer of
papaya in Brazil.
In summary, there is limited information on the impact
of climate change on diseases of tropical and plantation
crops as a result of lack of experimental studies (Table 1).
The potential effects of climate change depend on speciﬁc
host–pathogen combinations, and associated beneﬁcial
microorganisms; hence, impact cannot be generalized
without further detailed studies. In general, the discus-
sions above are based on projected future scenarios using
the knowledge available in the literature for hosts, patho-
gens and diseases. Thus, there is an uncertainty associated
with the ﬁtness of hosts and pathogens. In some cases, cer-
tain cultivars will not be grown where they are currently
growing and there will be a change in the geographical
distribution of crops, and this aspect has not been consid-
ered.
Impact on disease management strategies
Disease management strategies are inﬂuenced by climate
conditions. Because of the limited information about the
impact of climate change on tropical and plantation crop
diseases, pests and weeds, it is difﬁcult to predict the
effects on integrated pest management. Certainly, quar-
antine measures to control emerging pathogens, for
example, will be very important in order to prevent the
spread of the pathogens into new areas, because of the
alterations in disease geographical and temporal distribu-
tion resulting from climate change.
According to Coakley & Scherm (1996), soilborne
pathogens will remain more difﬁcult to control than
foliar pathogens because of fewer management options.
Once the soil is infested, some pathogens can survive for
years, even in the absence of a susceptible host. Therefore,
quarantine measures and exclusion will continue to play
an important role in controlling these diseases.
There have been few discussions on how chemical con-
trol will be affected by climate change, despite the impor-
tance of this subject. One of the few papers on this subject
was published by Ziska & Goins (2006), who concluded
that depending on weed species (C
3 or C 4 metabolism),
elevated CO2 concentration can increase weed biomass,
decrease yields, and reduce glyphosate herbicide efﬁcacy
for Roundup Ready soybean. Changes in temperature
and precipitation can alter fungicide residue dynamics in
foliage, and product degradation can be modiﬁed (Coak-
ley et al., 1999). Alterations in plant morphology or phys-
iology, resulting from growth in a CO
2-enriched
atmosphere or from different temperature and precipita-
tion conditions, can affect the penetration, translocation
and mode of action of systemic fungicides, as demon-
strated by Edis et al. (1996) for the herbicide chlorotolu-
ron. Besides, changes in plant growth can alter the period
of higher susceptibility to pathogens, which can deter-
mine a new fungicide application calendar (Coakley
Climate change and diseases of tropical and plantation crops 127
Plant Pathology (2011) 60, 122–132
 13653059, 2011, 1, Downloaded from https://bsppjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2010.02403.x, Wiley Online Library on [26/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

et al., 1999; Chakraborty & Pangga, 2004; Pritchard &
Amthor, 2005).
The fungicide market will certainly change. Chen &
McCarl (2001) performed a regression analysis between
pesticide usage [provided by the United States Depart-
ment of Agriculture (USDA)] and climate variations in
several US locations, with climate data provided by the
National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA). Average per-acre pesticide usage cost for corn,
cotton, potatoes, soybeans and wheat were found to
increase as precipitation increased. Similarly, average
pesticide usage cost for corn, cotton, soybean and pota-
toes increased, whilst the pesticide usage cost for wheat
decreased with rising temperatures. Despite the increas-
ing fungicides market in tropical areas, no study has been
performed to assess these changes.
However, the main impact of climate change on chemi-
cal control may be felt via changing attitudes towards the
use of chemicals for plant disease control. The fact that
humankind is suffering the consequences of anthropo-
genic activity on this planet to sustain the ever-growing
human population and its increasing needs will raise
awareness that this activity must be conducted in a sus-
tainable way. Society may increasingly exert pressure to
phase out chemicals such as fungicides in favour of non-
chemical methods for plant disease control.
Table 1 Potential effects of climate change on tropical and plantation crop diseases
Host Pathogen Disease severity Reasons for effects Reference
Banana Mycosphaerella ﬁjiensis ) Reduced relative humidity Ghini et al. (2007),
Jesus Ju´nior et al. (2008b)
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. cubense + Increased temperatures and
periods of drought
Gasparotto & Pereira (2008)
Cashew Oidium anacardier, Colletotrichum
gloeosporioides, Colletotrichum
acutatum, Pilgeriella anacardii
+ Increased precipitation J.E. Cardoso and F.M.P. Viana,
personal communication
Cassava Xanthomonas axonopodis
pv. manihotis
± Depends on the region H.S.A. Silva and E.C. Andrade,
personal communication
Citrus Xylella fastidiosa, ‘Candidatus
Liberibacter’ spp.), Citrus leprosis
virus
+ Increased vector population Jesus Ju ´nior et al. (2008a)
Guignardia citricarpa, Colletotrichum
acutatum
+ Increased temperatures Jesus Ju ´nior et al. (2008a)
Coconut palm Camarotella torrendiella, Camarotella
crocomiae, Phytomonas sp.,
Bipolaris incurvata, Phytophthora
spp.
) Reduced precipitation and
increased temperature
D.R.N. Warwick, V. Talamini,
R.R.C. Carvalho and A.M.F. Silva,
personal communication
Coffee Hemileia vastatrix + Increased winter
temperatures and CO2
concentration
Chalfoun et al. (2001);
Pozza & Alves (2008); Mendes
(2009)
Meloidogyne incognita + Increased temperatures Ghini et al. (2008b)
Eucalyptus Cylindrocladium quinqueseptatum + Increased temperatures and
precipitation
Booth et al. (2000)
Puccinia psidii ) Increased temperatures Moraes et al. (2008)
Ralstonia solanacearum,
Xanthomonas sp.,
Quambalaria eucalypti
= Increased temperatures Alfenas et al. (2004)
Ceratocystis ﬁmbriata,
Cylindrocladium sp., R.
solanacearum, Xanthomonas sp.
+ Increased temperatures and
stressed plants
R.G. Maﬁa, A.C. Alfenas and
R.A. Loss, personal communication
Papaya Asperisporium caricae ) Increased temperatures and
reduced relative humidity
Jesus Ju´nior et al. (2007)
Pineapple Fusarium subglutinans f. sp. ananas ) Increased temperatures Matos et al. (2000)
Sugarcane Ustilago scitaminea, SCMV Potyvirus,
Xanthomonas albilineans, Leifsonia
xyli subsp. xyli
= Spread by the use of infected
material for vegetative
propagation or infected
cutting instrument
Sanguino (2008)
Ceratocystis paradoxa ) Increased temperatures Chakraborty et al. (1998)
+: increased severity; ): decreased severity; =: no change.
128 R. Ghini et al.
Plant Pathology (2011) 60, 122–132
 13653059, 2011, 1, Downloaded from https://bsppjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2010.02403.x, Wiley Online Library on [26/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

One of the direct consequences of climate change on
pathogen–host relationships will be altered genetic resis-
tance to diseases. Many changes in plant physiology can
alter the resistance mechanisms of cultivars obtained by
both traditional and genetic-engineering methods.
Several studies provide evidence of these alterations, such
as signiﬁcant increases in photosynthetic rates, papillae
production, silicon accumulation in appressorial penetra-
tion sites, higher carbohydrate accumulation in leaves,
more wax, additional epidermal cell layers, increased
ﬁbre content, reduction in nutrient concentration and
alteration in the production of resistance-related enzymes
(Hibberd et al. , 1996; Chakraborty et al. , 2000). There
are few studies to verify the effects of increased CO
2 con-
centration on disease control using resistant cultivars.
According to Braga et al. (2006), exposure to CO
2-
enriched atmospheres changed inducible defence
responses in soybean plants against pathogens. These
changes occurred in individual metabolites and were
dependent on cultivar resistance patterns. On the other
hand, there are a larger number of studies regarding the
effects of temperature and other climate variables. Huang
et al. (2006), for example, concluded that temperature
and leaf wetness duration affected the phenotypic expres-
sion of Rlm6-mediated resistance in leaves and subse-
quent spread of Leptosphareria maculans in Brassica
napus down petioles to produce stem cankers.
There is almost no information on the impact of cli-
mate change on biological control of plant disease (Ghini
et al. , 2008a). Stacey (2003) discussed evidence of the
effects of climate change on biological control agents
(entomopathogens, predators and parasitoids) of pests.
The few results obtained focus on the impact of climate
change on the composition and dynamics of the microbial
community of the phyllosphere and the soil, which can be
very important for plant health (Reza ´ cova´ et al. , 2005;
Kanerva et al. , 2006; Lagomarsino et al., 2007). Analy-
sing the effects of climate change on commercialized bio-
control agents of plant diseases in Brazil, Bettiol & Ghini
(2009) stated that Bacillus subtilis and Trichoderma spp.,
the main agents available in the tropics, will be less
affected than some others. However, they stated that
Coniothyrium minitans and Clonostachys rosea, depend-
ing on region, may have reduced efﬁcacy in controlling
diseases.
Key soil aspects for microbial activity will be modiﬁed
under a changing climate, including soil nutrient avail-
ability, soil temperature and soil water content. In addi-
tion, the amount of nitrogen introduced into natural and
agricultural systems through fertilizers and pollutants
can have signiﬁcant effects on the microbiota (Nosengo,
2003). Gru¨ ter et al. (2006) concluded that exposing soil
to an environment of 600 p.p.m. CO
2 did not quantita-
tively alter the soil’s bacterial community. This is not sur-
prising given that the level of soil CO 2 ﬂuctuates widely
and can easily exceed these levels. The same authors con-
cluded that one of the potential effects of climate change
is on plant diversity, which can lead to changes in soil bac-
terial composition (types of bacteria and frequency of
occurrence). Using a FACE experiment to evaluate the
effects on saprotrophic fungi, Reza ´ cova´ et al. (2005)
observed that C. rosea , an important biological control
agent of Botrytis and other pathogens, and Metarrhizium
anisopliae, one of the most important entomopathogens
for insect pest control, were strongly associated with the
cover crop in a high-CO
2-concentration environment.
The authors suggest the abundance of these fungus spe-
cies can indicate an increase in the suppressiveness of soil
to phytopathogenic fungi and other pests.
Warwick (2001) conducted one of the few detailed
studies on the effect of climatic conditions on biological
control efﬁciency, demonstrating the effects of rainfall
regime and time of application of Acremonium persici-
num for control of black leaf spot of coconut, caused by
Camarotella torrendiella and C. acrocomiae . The appli-
cation of the biocontrol agent gave best results in the
rainy season and when performed in the afternoon. Such
studies will be important for maintaining the efﬁciency of
biological control both natural and through the introduc-
tion of bioagents. The prediction of the effects of climate
change on biological control of plant disease is complex
and currently based on indirect observations. Neverthe-
less, the vulnerability of biocontrol agents will surely be
higher with climate change, since this is one of the prob-
lems with applying antagonists (Garrettet al., 2006).
The adaptability of some agricultural systems can help
minimize the negative impact of climate change with the
adoption of new cultivars and other practices. Most trop-
ical and plantation crops are perennial, which hinders the
adoption of management measures in the short term
because of the high cost of replacing the plants. Cultures
located in marginal areas will suffer a period of chronic
stress, leading to increased predisposition to diseases.
Developing countries will have more difﬁculties adapting
to climate change, because of lower technological devel-
opment and scarce resources available for the adoption of
measures. Developing countries need strong cooperation
from industrial countries, as well as non-governmental
organizations and international scientiﬁc societies, to
adapt to the impact on food production caused by plant
diseases under future climate scenarios.
In general, climate change will favour biological con-
trol, both natural and introduced, since awareness
towards environmental problems will demand measures
that minimize pollutant emissions, reduce the use of
chemical pesticides and increase sustainability. There-
fore, the biological equilibrium of agricultural systems
will be beneﬁted, leading to an increase in the complexity
of the system, and consequently, to biological control. To
achieve that, specialists from different agriculture-related
areas need to go beyond disciplinary boundaries and posi-
tion the impact of climate change in a broader context,
including the whole agroecosystem.
The way forward
Maintaining the sustainability of agricultural systems
directly depends upon plant protection. In a few decades,
Climate change and diseases of tropical and plantation crops 129
Plant Pathology (2011) 60, 122–132
 13653059, 2011, 1, Downloaded from https://bsppjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2010.02403.x, Wiley Online Library on [26/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

climate change may alter the current scenario of plant dis-
eases and their management. These changes will certainly
have effects on productivity. Therefore, studying the
impact on important plant diseases is essential to mini-
mize yield and quality losses, helping in the selection of
strategies to work around problems (Chakraborty et al.,
2000). For pathosystems discussed above, long-term
studies on host physiology, epidemiology, genetics and
evolution of host–pathogen populations under changing
climate using different experimental strategies (OTC,
FACE, controlled conditions) should be considered when
planning investigations.
Interdisciplinary approaches, preferably by interna-
tional programmes, must be adopted to assess the effects
of climate change on diseases of tropical and plantation
crops. The complexity of the processes involved and their
relationships require communication between profes-
sionals in the various areas concerned.
Acknowledgement
The authors would like to acknowledge the research
grant from The National Council for Scientiﬁc and Tech-
nological Development (CNPq), Brazil.
References
Adejumo TO, 2005. Crop protection strategies for major diseases
of cocoa, coffee and cashew in Nigeria.African Journal of
Biotechnology 4, 143–50.
Agrios GN, 2005.Plant Pathology, 5th edn. London, UK: Elsevier.
Ainsworth EA, Long SP, 2005. What have we learned from
15 years of free-air CO2 enrichment (FACE)? A meta-analytic
review of the responses of photosynthesis, canopy properties and
plant production to rising CO2. New Phytologist 165, 351–72.
Ainsworth EA, Beier C, Calfapietra Cet al., 2008. Next generation
of elevated [CO2] experiments with crops: a critical investment
for feeding the future world.Plant, Cell & Environment 31,
1317–24.
Alfenas AC, Zauza EAV, Maﬁa RG, Assis TF, 2004.Clonagem e
Doenc¸as do Eucalipto.V i c¸osa, Brazil: Universidade Federal
de Vic¸osa (UFV).
A s s a dE D ,P i n t oH S ,Z u l l oJ u´nior J, A´ vila AMH, 2004. Impacto
das mudanc¸as clima´ticas no zoneamento agroclima´tico do cafe´
no Brasil.Pesquisa Agropecua´ ria Brasileira 39, 1057–64.
Ausmus BS, Hilty JW, 1972. Reﬂectance studies of healthy, maize
dwarf mosaic virus-infected, andHelminthosporium maydis-
infected corn leaves.Remote Sensing of Environment 2, 77–81.
Bergamin Filho A, Salgado CL, Fegies NC, Ribeiro IJA, 1990.
Horizontal resistance in threeCoffea arabicacultivars to
Hemileia vastatrix. Fitopatologia Brasileira 15, 308–13.
Bettiol W, Ghini R, 2009. Impactos das mudanc¸as clima´ticas sobre
o controle biolo´ gico de doenc¸as de plantas. In: Bettiol W,
Morandi MAB, eds.Biocontrole de Doenc¸as de Plantas: Uso e
Perspectivas.J a g u a r i u´na, Brazil: Embrapa Meio Ambiente,
29–48.
Blackburn GA, 2007. Hyperspectral remote sensing of plant
pigments.Journal of Experimental Botany 58, 855–67.
Booth TH, Jovanovic T, Old KM, Dudzinski MJ, 2000. Climatic
mapping to identify high-risk areas forCylindrocladium
quinqueseptatumleaf blight on eucalypts in mainland South East
Asia and around the world.Environmental Pollution 108,
365–72.
Bortier K, De Temmerman L, Ceulemans R, 2000. Effects of ozone
exposure in open-top chambers on poplar (Populus nigra)a n d
beech (Fagus sylvatica): a comparison.Environmental
Pollution 109, 509–16.
Braga MR, Aidar MPM, Marabesi MA, Godoy JRL, 2006. Effects
of elevated CO2 on the phytoalexin production of two soybean
cultivars differing in the resistance to stem canker disease.
Environmental and Experimental Botany 58, 85–92.
Campbell JB, 2007.Introduction to Remote Sensing.N e wY o r k ,
USA: The Guilford Press.
Carter GA, 1993. Responses of leaf spectral reﬂectance to plant
stress.American Journal of Botany 80, 239–43.
Cerri CEP, Sparovek G, Bernoux M, Easterling WE, Melillo
JM, Cerri CC, 2007. Tropical agriculture and global
warming: impacts and mitigation options.Scientia Agricola
64, 83–99.
Chakraborty S, Datta S, 2003. How will plant pathogens adapt to
host plant resistance at elevated CO2 under a changing climate?
New Phytologist 159, 733–42.
Chakraborty S, Pangga IB, 2004. Plant disease and climate change.
In: Gillings M, Holmes A, eds.Plant Microbiology. London, UK:
BIOS Scientiﬁc Publishers, 163–80.
Chakraborty S, Murray GM, Magarey PAet al., 1998. Potential
impact of climate change on plant diseases of economic signiﬁcance
to Australia.Australasian Plant Pathology27, 15–35.
Chakraborty S, Tiedemann AV, Teng PS, 2000. Climate change:
potential impact on plant diseases.Environmental Pollution
108, 317–26.
Chakraborty S, Luck J, Hollaway Get al., 2008. Impacts of global
change on diseases of agricultural crops and forest trees.CAB
Reviews: Perspectives in Agriculture, Veterinary Science,
Nutrition and Natural Resources 3, 054.
Chalfoun SM, Carvalho VL, Pereira MC, 2001. Efeito de
alterac¸o˜ es clima´ticas sobre o progresso da ferrugem (Hemileia
vastatrixBerk. & Br.) do cafeeiro (Coffea arabicaL.). Cieˆncia e
Agrotecnologia 25, 1248–52.
Chen CC, McCarl BA, 2001. An investigation of the relationship
between pesticide usage and climate change.Climatic Change
50, 475–87.
Coakley SM, Scherm H, 1996. Plant disease in a changing global
environment.Aspects of Applied Biology 45, 227–38.
Coakley SM, Scherm H, Chakraborty S, 1999. Climate change and
plant disease management.Annual Review of Phytopathology
37, 399–426.
Colwell RN, 1956. Determining the prevalence of certain cereal
crop diseases by means of aerial photography.Hilgardia 26,
223–86.
Deutsch CA, Tewksbury JJ, Huey RBet al., 2008. Impacts of
climate warming on terrestrial ectotherms across latitude.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 105,
6668–72.
Eastburn DM, Degennaro MM, Delucia EH, Dermody O,
McElrone AJ, 2010. Elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide and
ozone alter soybean diseases at SoyFACE.Global Change
Biology 16, 320–30.
Edis D, Hull MR, Cobb AH, Sanders-Mills GE, 1996. A study of
herbicide action and resistance at elevated levels of carbon
dioxide.Aspects of Applied Biology 45, 205–9.
130 R. Ghini et al.
Plant Pathology (2011) 60, 122–132
 13653059, 2011, 1, Downloaded from https://bsppjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2010.02403.x, Wiley Online Library on [26/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Erbs M, Fangmeier A, 2006. Atmospheric carbon dioxide
enrichment effects on ecosystems – experiments and the real
world.Progress in Botany 67, 441–59.
FAO, 2010.ProdSTAT[http://faostat.fao.org/site/291/
default.aspx].
Feichtenberger E, Bassanezi RB, Spo´ sito MB, Belasque Jr J, 2005.
Doenc¸as dos citros (Citrus spp.). In: Kimati H, Amorim L,
Rezende JAM, Bergamin Filho A, Camargo LEA, eds.Manual
de Fitopatologia.S a˜o Paulo, Brazil: Agronoˆ mica Ceres,
239–69.
Freire FCO, Cardoso JE, Santos AA, Viana FMP, 2002. Diseases of
cashew nut plants (Anacardium occidentaleL.) in Brazil.Crop
Protection 21, 489–94.
Garrett KA, Dendy SP, Frank EE, Rouse MN, Travers SE, 2006.
Climate change effects on plant disease: genomes to ecosystems.
Annual Review of Phytopathology 44, 489–509.
Gasparotto L, Pereira JCR, 2008. Impacto potencial das mudanc¸as
clima´ticas sobre as doenc¸as da bananeira no Brasil. In: Ghini R,
Hamada E, eds.Mudanc¸as Clima´ticas: Impactos sobre Doenc¸as
de Plantas no Brasil. Brası´lia, Brazil: Embrapa, 201–6.
Gay C, Estrada CG, Conde C, Eakin H, Villers L, 2006. Potential
impacts of climate change on agriculture: a case of study of
coffee production in Veracruz, Mexico.Climatic Change 79,
259–88.
Ghini R, Hamada E, 2008.Mudanc¸as Clima´ticas: Impactos sobre
Doenc¸as de Plantas no Brasil. Brası´lia, Brazil: Embrapa⁄ SCT.
G h i n iR ,H a m a d aE ,G o n c¸alves RRV, Gasparotto L, Pereira JC,
2007. Ana´lise de risco das mudanc¸as clima´ticas globais sobre a
sigatoka-negra da bananeira no Brasil.Fitopatologia Brasileira
32, 197–204.
Ghini R, Hamada E, Bettiol W, 2008a. Climate change and plant
diseases.Scientia Agricola 65, 98–107.
G h i n iR ,H a m a d aE ,P e d r oJ u´ nior MJ, Marengo JA, Gonc¸alves
RRV, 2008b. Risk analysis of climate change on coffee
nematodes and leaf miner in Brazil.Pesquisa Agropecua´ ria
Brasileira 43, 187–94.
Gleadow RM, Evans JR, McCaffery S, Cavagnaro TR, 2009.
Growth and nutritive value of cassava (Manihot esculenta
Cranz.) are reduced when grown in elevated CO2. Plant
Biology 11, 76–82.
Graeff S, Link J, Chaupein W, 2006. Identiﬁcation of powdery
mildew (Erysiphe graminissp. tritici) and take-all disease
(Gaeumannomyces graminissp. tritici)i nw h e a t(Triticum
aestivumL.) by means of leaf reﬂectance measurements.Central
European Journal of Biology 1, 275–88.
Gru¨ ter D, Schmid B, Brandl H, 2006. Inﬂuence of plant diversity
and elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide levels on belowground
bacteria diversity.BMC Microbiology 6, 1–8.
Hamada E, Gonc¸alves RRV, Marengo JA, Ghini R, 2008.
Cena´rios clima´ticos futuros para o Brasil. In: Ghini R, Hamada
E, eds.Mudanc¸as Clima´ticas: Impactos sobre Doenc¸as de
Plantas no Brasil. Brası´lia, Brazil: Embrapa, 25–73.
Hamid Muhammed H, Larsolle A, 2003. Feature vector based
analysis of hyperspectral crop reﬂectance data for discrimination
and quantiﬁcation of fungal disease severity in wheat.
Biosystems Engineering 86, 125–34.
Hibberd JM, Whitbread R, Farrar JF, 1996. Effect of elevated
concentrations of CO2 on infection of barley byErysiphe graminis.
Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology48, 37–53.
H u a n gY J ,E v a n sN ,L iZ Qet al., 2006. Temperature and leaf
wetness duration affect phenotypic expression ofRlm6-mediated
resistance toLeptosphaeria maculansin Brassica napus. New
Phytologist 170, 129–41.
Jackson RD, 1986. Remote sensing of biotic and abiotic plant
stress.Annual Review of Phytopathology 24, 265–87.
Jeger MJ, Pautasso M, 2008. Plant disease and global change—the
importance of long–term data sets.New Phytologist 177, 8–11.
Jesus Ju´ nior WC, Cecı´lio RA, Valadares Ju´ nior R et al., 2007.
Aquecimento global e potencial impacto na cultura e doenc¸as
do mamoeiro. In: Martins DS, Costa NA, Costa AFS, eds.
Papaya Brasil: Manejo, Qualidade e Mercado do Mama ˜o.
Vito´ ria, Brazil: Incaper, 83–100.
Jesus Ju´ nior WC, Morandi MAB, Christiano RSC, Yamamoto PT,
2008a. Impacto potencial das mudanc¸as clima´ticas sobre as
principais doenc¸as de citros no estado de Sa˜o Paulo. In: Ghini R,
Hamada E, eds.Mudanc¸as Clima´ticas: Impactos sobre Doenc¸as
de Plantas no Brasil.B r a s ı´lia, Brazil: Embrapa, 235–56.
Jesus Ju´ nior WC, Valadares Ju´ nior R, Cecı´lio RV et al., 2008b.
Worldwide geographical distribution of Black Sigatoka for
banana: predictions based on climate change models.Scientia
Agricola 65, 40–53.
Kanerva T, Palojarvi A, Ramo K, Ojanpera K, Esala M, Manninen
S, 2006. A 3-year exposure to CO2 and O3 induced minor
changes in soil N cycling in a meadow ecosystem.Plant and Soil
286, 61–73.
Karnosky DF, Percy KE, Xiang Bet al., 2002. Interacting elevated
CO2 and tropospheric O3 predisposes aspen (Populus
tremuloidesMichx.) to infection by rust (Melampsora medusaef.
sp. tremuloidae). Global Change Biology 8, 329–38.
Kushalappa AC, Eskes AB, 1989. Advances in coffee rust research.
Annual Review of Phytopathology 27, 503–31.
Lagomarsino A, Knapp BA, Moscatelli MC, De Angelis P, Grego S,
Insam H, 2007. Structural and functional diversity of soil
microbes is affected by elevated CO2 and N addition in a poplar
plantation.Journal of Soils and Sediments 7, 399–405.
Lessin RC, Ghini R, 2009. Efeito do aumento da concentrac¸a˜od e
CO2 atmosfe´rico sobre o oı´d i oeoc r e s c i m e n t od ep l a n t a sd e
soja.Tropical Plant Pathology 34, 385–92.
Lorenzen B, Jensen A, 1989. Changes in spectral properties induced
in barley by cereal powdery mildew.Remote Sensing of
Environment 27, 201–9.
Malthus TJ, Madeira AC, 1993. High resolution
spectroradiometry: spectral reﬂectance of ﬁeld bean leaves
infected byBotrytis fabae. Remote Sensing of Environment
45, 107–16.
Mangrauthia SK, Shakya VPS, Jain RK, Praveen S, 2009. Ambient
temperature perception in papaya for papaya ringspot virus
interaction.Virus Genes 38, 429–34.
Massola Jr NS, Bedendo IP, 2005. Doenc¸as da mandioca (Manihot
esculenta) .I n :K i m a t iH ,A m o r i mL ,R e z e n d eJ A M ,B e r g a m i n
Filho A, Camargo LEA, eds.Manual de Fitopatologia.S a˜o
Paulo, Brazil: Agronoˆ mica Ceres, 449–55.
Matos AP, Cabral JRS, Sanches NF, Caldas RC, 2000. Effect of
temperature and rainfall on the incidence ofFusarium
subglutinanson pineapple fruits.Acta Horticulturae 529,
265–72.
Mendes L, 2009.Impacto do Aumento da Concentrac¸a˜od eC O2
Atmosfe´rico sobre o Perı´odo Latente e o Controle Biolo´ gico da
Ferrugem do Cafeeiro. Botucatu, Brazil: UNESP, MSc
dissertation.
Mikkelsen TN, Beier C, Jonasson Set al., 2008. Experimental
design of multifactor climate change experiments with elevated
Climate change and diseases of tropical and plantation crops 131
Plant Pathology (2011) 60, 122–132
 13653059, 2011, 1, Downloaded from https://bsppjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2010.02403.x, Wiley Online Library on [26/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

CO2, warming and drought: the CLIMAITE project.Functional
Ecology 22, 185–95.
Milanez JM, Parra JRP, Custo´ dio IC, Magri DC, Cera C, 2002.
Biologia e exigeˆncias te´rmicas de treˆse s p e´cies de cigarrinhas
vetoras da bacte´ria Xylella fastidiosa. Laranja 23, 127–40.
Mitchell CE, Reich PB, Tilman D, Groth JV, 2003. Effects of
elevated CO2, nitrogen deposition, and decreased species
diversity on foliar fungal plant disease.Global Change Biology
9, 438–51.
Moraes WB, Jesus Ju´ nior WC, Cosmi FC, Maﬁa RG, 2008. The
potential effect of climatic changes on the geographical
distribution of eucalyptus rust disease in Brazil. In:IV World
Congress of Agronomists and Professionals in Agronomy, 2008,
Madrid,v o l .1 ,5 – 8 .
Nakicenovic N, Swart R, 2000.Emissions Scenarios. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Nosengo N, 2003. Fertilized to death.Nature 425, 894–5.
Osama K, Hosoi F, Konishi A, 2007. 3D lidar imaging for
detecting and understanding plant responses and canopy
structure.Journal of Experimental Botany 58, 881–98.
Percy KE, Awmack CS, Lindroth RLet al., 2002. Altered
performance of forest pests under atmospheres enriched by CO2
and O3. Nature 420, 403–7.
Plessl M, Elstner Ef, Rennenberg H, Habermeyer J, Heiser I, 2007.
Inﬂuence of elevated CO2 and ozone concentrations on late
blight resistance and growth of potato plants.Environmental
and Experimental Botany 60, 447–57.
Ploetz RC, Thomaz JE, Slabaugh WR, 2003. Diseases of banana
and plantain. In: Ploetz RC, ed.Diseases of Tropical Fruit Crops.
Wallingford, UK: CABI Publishing, 73–134.
Pozza EA, Alves MC, 2008. Impacto potencial das mudanc¸as
clima´ticas sobre as doenc¸as fu´ ngicas do cafeeiro no Brasil. In:
G h i n iR ,H a m a d aE ,e d s .Mudanc¸as Clima´ticas: Impactos sobre
Doenc¸as de Plantas no Brasil. Brası´lia, Brazil: Embrapa, 215–33.
Pritchard SG, Amthor JS, 2005.Crops and Environmental Change.
Binghamton, NY, USA: Food Products Press.
Reza´cova´ V, Blum H, Hrselova´ H, Gamper H, Gryndler M, 2005.
Saprobic microfungi underLolium perenneand Trifolium repens
at different fertilization intensities and elevated atmospheric CO2
concentration.Global Change Biology 11, 224–30.
Rezende JAM, Martins MC, 2005. Doenc¸as do mamoeiro (Carica
papaya) .I n :K i m a t iH ,A m o r i mL ,R e z e n d eJ A M ,B e r g a m i n
Filho A, Camargo LEA, eds.Manual de Fitopatologia.S a˜o
Paulo, Brazil: Agronoˆ mica Ceres, 435–43.
Riikonen J, Syrja¨la¨ L, Tulva Iet al., 2008. Stomatal characteristics
and infection biology ofPyrenopeziza betulicolain Betula
pendulatrees grown under elevated CO2 and O3.
Environmental Pollution 156, 536–43.
Sanches NF, Matos AP, Meissner Filho PE, 2000. Murcha
associada a` cochonilha. In: Reinhardt DH, Souza LFS, Cabral
JRS, eds.Abacaxi: Produc¸a˜o – Aspectos Te´cnicos.B r a s ı´lia,
Brazil: Embrapa, 62–5.
Sanguino A, 2008. Impacto potencial das mudanc¸as clima´ticas
sobre as principais doenc¸as da cana-de-ac¸u´ car no Brasil. In:
G h i n iR ,H a m a d aE ,e d s .Mudanc¸as Clima´ticas: Impactos sobre
Doenc¸as de Plantas no Brasil. Brası´lia, Brazil: Embrapa,
207–13.
Sether DM, Karasev AV, Okumura Cet al., 2001. Differentiation,
distribution and elimination of two different pineapple mealybug
wilt-associated viruses found in pineapple.Plant Disease 85,
856–64.
Sether DM, Melzer MJ, Busto J, Zee F, Hu JS, 2005. Diversity and
mealybug transmissibility of ampeloviruses in pineapple.Plant
Disease 89, 450–6.
Solomon S, Qin D, Manning Met al., 2007.Climate Change 2007:
The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I
for the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Stacey D, 2003. Climate and biological control in organic crops.
International Journal of Pest Management 49, 205–14.
Strange RN, Scott PR, 2005. Plant disease: a threat to global food
security.Annual Review of Phytopathology 43, 83–116.
Tiedemann AV, Firsching KH, 2000. Interactive effects of elevated
ozone and carbon dioxide on growth and yield of leaf rust-
infected versus non-infected wheat.Environmental Pollution
108, 357–63.
Verdier V, 2002. Bacteriosis vascular (o an˜ ublo bacteriano) della
yuca causada porXanthomonas axonopodispv. manihotis.I n :
Ospina PB, Ceballos H, Alvarez Eet al.,e d s .La Yuca en el
Tercer Milenio: Sistemas Modernos de Produccio´ n,
Procesamiento, Utilizacio´ n y Comercializacio´ n.C a l i ,
Colombia: Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical (CIAT),
CIAT publication no. 327.
Warwick DRN, 2001. Colonizac¸a˜o de estromas deSphaerodothis
acrocomiaeagente causal da lixa grande do coqueiro por
Acremonium persicinum. Fitopatologia Brasileira 26, 220.
Watson RT, 2001.Climate Change 2001: Synthesis Report.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Zambolim L, Vale FXR, Pereira AA, Chaves GM, 1999. Manejo
integrado das doenc¸as do cafeeiro. In: Zambolim L, ed.
Produc¸a˜od eC a f e´ com Qualidade.V i c¸osa, Brazil: Universidade
Federal de Vic¸osa (UFV), 134–215.
Ziska LH, Goins EW, 2006. Elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide
and weed populations in glyphosate treated soybean.Crop
Science 46, 1354–9.
132 R. Ghini et al.
Plant Pathology (2011) 60, 122–132
 13653059, 2011, 1, Downloaded from https://bsppjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2010.02403.x, Wiley Online Library on [26/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

