RASSA Journal of Science for Society 4(1): 36-44, April 2022
DOI: 10.5958/2583-3715.2022.00005.3
Scientific Correspondence
*Corresponding Author
rasaviswanathan@yahoo.co.in
Key words
Red rot, smut, wilt, leaf scald,
sugarcane mosaic, yellow
leaf, foliar diseasesReceived: January 12, 2022
Accepted: April 02, 2022
IndianJournals.com
A product of Diva Enterprises Pvt. Ltd.
Sugarcane Diseases: Diagnostics and Management
R. Viswanathan*
Division of Crop Protection, ICAR-Sugarcane Breeding Institute, Coimbatore-641007,
Tamil Nadu, India
Sugarcane is a major field crop grown essentially for sugar and other sweeteners in India and in
many other tropical and subtropical countries. Recently, it has emerged as a bioenergy crop for
producing bioethanol for automobiles. Diseases caused by fungi, bacteria, viruses, phytoplasma
and nematodes have become major constraints for sugarcane productivity. In spite of all the efforts
of breeding for disease resistant varieties, this crop is becoming more and more prone to many
diseases. The disease incidences are increasing at an alarming rate and the yield is falling down
every year and sugarcane diseases cause a loss of several billions of dollars across the globe,
every season. About 10-15 per cent of the nations sugar produced are lost due to diseases. Among
the diseases red rot, smut, wilt and pineapple disease (sett rot) are the important fungal diseases.
Bacterial diseases like leaf scald (LSD) and ratoon stunting (RSD) are found to cause considerable
yield loss in some states. Also red stripe are known to cause damage in subtropical regions in
India. Among the viral diseases, mosaic and yellow leaf (YLD) are the major diseases affecting
sugarcane. Besides these, grassy shoot caused by phytoplasmas is also a potential disease, which
can cause considerable damage to sugarcane production in all the states. Foliar diseases such as
yellow spot, brown spot, brown stripe, eye spot, ring spot, rust etc may cause loss to sugarcane
depending on the prevailing environmental conditions. Many promising varieties were removed from
cultivation in the past since they succumbed to new pathogenic variants of red rot with more
virulence. Also slow build up of many non-fungal diseases in sugarcane causes decline in varietal
performance and results in varietal degeneration. In this review, important diseases of sugarcane
and their management are briefly described.
MAJOR DISEASES AFFECTING SUGARCANE
PRODUCTION IN INDIA
Red rot
It is one of the most widespread sugarcane diseases
in the country and it has been a constraint for the past 100
years in India and other South Asian countries. It was
involved in the failure of important commercial varieties
like Co 312, Co 419, Co 453, Co 658, Co 997, Co 1148,
Co 6304, Co 7805, CoC 671, CoC 85061, CoC 92061, CoJ
64, CoLk 8102, CoS 8436, SoSe 92423, CoSe 95422 etc
(Viswanathan, 2021a). Currently the disease occurs in all
the sugarcane growing states in India except Karnataka and
Maharashtra states, more severely in the states of Uttar
Pradesh and Bihar. The disease is caused by the fungal
pathogen Colletotrichum falcatum  Went. The pathogen
infection seriously affects crop productivity since infected
stalks become unfit for milling and partial infection also
affect the quality of canes due to inversion of sucrose to
reducing sugars. In the advanced stages, entire stool dries
up. When such canes are split open longitudinally they
show reddened areas with horizontal white patches. The
entire parenchymatous tissues are affected and in later
stages they form a hollow cavity with dark grey mycelial
growth of the fungal pathogens.  On the rind, dark brownish
lesions of various sizes can be seen. Similarly necrosis on
nodal region is also commonly observed. In such canes,
cut ends show reddening with white patches.
Smut
The disease is caused by the fungus Sporisorium
scitamineum (Syd.) M. Piepenbr., M. Stoll & Oberw . 2002
(Syn: Ustilago scitaminea H. & P . Sydow). The fungus has
no alternate hosts. Disease affected stools give out
excessive tillers which are lanky and end up with black
whip structures. Affected clumps show profuse tillering
with lanky tillers. Occasionally whips are produced from
axillary buds also. The infected plants within a field often
arise from planting systemically infected setts or from
ratoons of infected clumps of previous crop. The disease
is very well adapted to aerial dispersal and spread. Smut is
generally favoured by hot dry weather conditions. High
rainfall reduces the severity of smut development. Disease
severity usually increases through ratoon crops. Plant stress
Sugarcane Diseases: Diagnostics and Management
https://www .rassa.org.in/online-publications/rjss/ 37
increases frequency of whip development; cultivars that
normally would not have whips may show symptoms
under high stress.
Wilt
Fusarium sacchari (E.J. Butler) W . Gams is the disease
causative fungus. The affected stools turn yellowish and
finally dry as in the case of red rot. Longitudinal splitting
of the affected cane shows dull brownish discolouration of
internal tissue with linear pith cavities and desiccation.
Wilt fungi are weak soil borne pathogens. Abiotic factors
like drought, waterlogging, drought followed by water
logging weaken the root system and predisposes the plant
for wilt infection. Subterranean soil pests such as white
grub, root borer and nematode and insect pests like mealy
bug, scale insect, fungal pathogen like red rot weakens the
plant and root system paving the way for wilt infection.
However, the myth of root borer is always associated with
wilt does not exist under field conditions (Viswanathan et
al., 2022). Wilt has caused significant losses in India where
several epidemics have occurred. It is responsible for the
elimination of many popular varieties from cultivation.
Wilt is very common in certain locations where conducive
environment and susceptible hosts are available
(Viswanathan, 2013, 2020). In most of the delta regions
and subtropical plains, endemic nature of the disease
prevails. The disease adversely affects germination. Wilt
incidence is always higher in ratoon crops compared with
the plant crop. Combined infection of red rot and wilt
causes more loss to the crop than their infection alone.
Earlier it was thought that the disease occurs during
maturity stage and its severity can be seen during harvest.
It is now established that the disease occurs during
germination onwards and cause death of the germinated
settlings or young plants. Wilt infection in young crops can
also be seen as dried canes with de-topped crown.
Sett rot (Pineapple disease)
Sett rot is caused by the fungal pathogen Cerotocystis
paradoxa. The disease is common in germinating setts. The
disease is primarily spread through soil borne inoculum
under ill-drained conditions. The fungus infects the setts
mainly through the cut ends and slowly spreads to the
entire parenchyma tissues. Sett rot infected setts fail to
germinate leaving many gaps in the field. In the early stage
of rotting, a stinky odour of pineapple is emitted due to
production of ethyl acetate and it helps in identifying the
disease. The disease is also found to cause damage to
standing canes in the field. Severe waterlogging, lodging
of canes and other stresses favour disease build up in the
field.
Ratoon stunting (RSD)
The disease is caused by the xylem limiting bacterium
Leifsonia (Clavibacter) xyli subsp. xyli (Lxx) (Davis et al. ).
Diseased clumps usually display stunted growth, reduced
tillering, thin stalks with shortened internodes and
yellowish foliage. The characteristic stunting and
unthriftness associated with RSD are usually greater when
there has been a growing period with moisture stress.
Growth of a disease crop is slower than that of a healthy
crop, and ultimately the yield is reduced. The reduction in
yield is due to the production of thinner and shorter stalks
rather than a reduction in the total number of canes. The
affected plants may not show any abnormality in the root
system or in the underground buds and portions of the
stalk. In general, the disease severity is more in older
varieties. The term ‘ratoon stunting’ is misnomer since the
disease also causes severe damage in plant crops. Diseased
stalks of some varieties may exhibit an internal
discolouration of vascular bundles at the lower portion of
nodes, but these symptoms are often ephemeral. They
appear as yellow to reddish brown dots, commas, or short
lines when viewed by slicing longitudinally through nodes.
The discolouration does not extend into the internode
unlike similar symptoms due to other diseases
(Viswanathan, 2012).
Grassy shoot
The disease is caused by sugarcane grassy shoot
(SCGS) phytoplasmas. It occurs throughout the country and
its severity is more in the areas where proper seed nursery
programmes are not there. Infected stools show excessive
and stunted tillers with narrow leaves. Most of the tillers
do not develop into millable canes. In the affected clump,
the few canes formed and are stunted with leaves being
yellow or white. In some cases, axillary bud sprouting with
yellow or paper white leaves may be seen. The whole
infected stool appears like a big bunch of grass (Nithya et
al., 2020). Grassy shoot can cause very heavy yield losses
particularly when planting material is obtained from
infected sources. The disease severity will be more in
ratoon crops and this contributes to poor yield in ratoons.
R. Viswanathan
38 RASSA Journal of Science for Society 4(1)
Mosaic
This is one of the oldest diseases recorded in India
and is associated with varietal degeneration. Sugarcane
mosaic virus  (SCMV) and Sugarcane streak mosaic virus
(SCSMV) cause mosaic disease in sugarcane in India. The
virus has abundant variation and a single strain can infect
sugarcane, maize and sorghum. Symptoms of mosaic may
vary in intensity with cultivar, growing conditions,
temperature and strain of the virus. The chlorotic areas are
most easily seen in young, rapidly growing leaves,
particularly near the basal portion of the leaf. The
proportion of the leaf that is covered by the chlorotic areas
may vary from scattered, short yellowish stripes to
chlorotic areas that predominate over the leaf with islands
of normal green. On older leaves, the symptoms tend to
recover and appear as healthy. The virus causes mild
mottling in the leaves with dark and light areas of
chlorophyll development. With more virulent strains,
stunting, yellowing, chlorosis and sometimes necrosis are
also noticed. Recently we found that infection of
debilitating strains affects yield and quality in sugarcane
(Viswanathan and Balamuralikrishnan, 2005). Generally,
long chlorotic streaks alternate with the normal green
portions of the leaf are observed in different varieties in
the country.
Yellow leaf (YLD)
This disease is caused by Sugarcane yellow leaf virus
(ScYLV) and reported in India during 1999 (Viswanathan,
2002). The symptoms appear initially on matured leaves
three through five usually in maturing plant or ratoon crop.
The symptoms could be very clear after 5 to 6 months of
crop growth. On the leaves, the symptom appears as
yellowish midrib on the lower surface. The yellowing may
be confined to midrib region or the yellow discolouration
may spread laterally to adjoining laminar region parallel
to midrib upto a distance of 2.0 cm. Reddish to pinkish
discolouration of midrib and laminar region is also noticed
in certain varieties.  In most susceptible varieties, typical
yellowing of midribs and laminar region is noticed on
upper surface of the leaves. Finally symptoms of necrosis
of discoloured laminar region from leaf tip to bottom and
subsequent drying of entire leaf is noticed. In ratoon crop,
the intensity of the disease will be much higher than in
plant crop. The sugarcane varieties showing mild
symptoms usually record normal cane growth. In severely
infected clumps, cane thickness and stalk height are
significantly affected. Severe infection of the disease leads
to shortening of internodes in the top. This effect culminates
in bunching of leaves at the top. Usually such infection
results in drying of entire clumps.  Severe infection of
ScYLV leads to reduced juice quality and sugar recovery.
Combined infection of ScYLV and RSD bacterium in
sugarcane causes severe stunting than their infection alone
(Viswanathan, 2002; 2004). The disease occurs in epidemic
form on most of the cultivated varieties in India (Rao et
al., 2000) and it adversely affects cane productivity in the
tropical region. The disease infection may result in 25-30
per cent loss to cane and juice yield in popular varieties
(Viswanathan, 2012, 2021c). Further, impact of the virus
infection on physiological parameters viz. photosynthetic
rate (A), stomatal conductance (gs) and SPAD meter values
and growth/yield parameters, such as stalk height, stalk
thickness and number of internodes revealed significant
reduction in sugarcane cultivars. In addition, to reductions
in stalk weight, height and girth, YL also reduced juice
yield in the affected canes up to 34.15% (Viswanathan et
al., 2014a).
Varietal degeneration
Sugarcane pathogens like SCMV , SCSMV , ScYLV ,
SCGS-phytoplasmas and ratoon stunting bacterium
systemically infect sugarcane and over the years the
varieties degenerate due to the systemic colonization of
these pathogens (Bagyalakshmi et al., 2019; Viswanathan,
2012, 2013, 2016, 2018). Decline in varietal performance
over the years is mainly due to accumulated pathogens
inside the stalk affecting cane growth and photosynthetic
efficiency, which directly results in reduced cane yield and
sugar yield. Although these viral/ bacterial pathogens cause
limited symptoms in the field, continuous vegetative
propagation results in enhanced pathogen load that would
increase the pathogenic potential to cause severe disease
symptoms. Combined infection of two or more viral/
bacterial pathogens accelerates the damage to the crop in
the field and this is due to infection of one pathogen makes
the plant more susceptible to another. In this way, a variety
degenerates faster and its potential comes down over the
years. Author has witnessed such degeneration in a popular
cv Co 419 in Karnataka state due its high susceptibility to
mosaic, YLD and RSD. Similarly, the cv CoC 671 another
popular variety of tropical region degenerated due its high
Sugarcane Diseases: Diagnostics and Management
https://www .rassa.org.in/online-publications/rjss/ 39
susceptibility to mosaic and YLD in different parts of
Karnataka and Maharashtra. In the subtropical region, CoS
767, the popular variety recently adversely suffered from
varietal degeneration caused by the pathogens causing
SCGS, RSD, YLD and mosaic and it led to its replacement
by the elite variety Co 0238 and it became very popular in
the region.
Pokkah boeng
The disease is common during rainy months in the
field. Although under normal situations it may not cause
significant yield loss it has the potential to arrest the crop
growth temporarily. The disease occurs throughout the
world and severe forms of the disease are recorded in high
humidity areas. Fusarium verticillioides  and F. sacchari are
the causative fungi (Teleomorph:  Gibberella fujikuroi  (K.
Sawada) H.W . Wollenweber). Recently association of F.
proliferatum with the disease has been found in India. The
disease manifests in two phases viz. pokkah boeng (PB) and
top rot. The most common symptom is a malformed or
twisted top, which gives this disease its name “ pokkah
boeng” from the Javanese language. Symptoms develop
during rainy periods which coincide with grand growth
period. Initially, young leaves are chlorotic at their base
and patchy elsewhere on the blade. Chlorosis is most
obvious on the lower surface of the leaf or in twisted
laminar regions, where white mycelium may be seen.
Affected leaves tend to be narrow at the base. Development
of further symptoms is dependent on the susceptibility of
the variety and on environmental conditions conducive to
the pathogen. Young leaves may become infected in the
spindle, resulting in pronounced wrinkling, twisting and
shortening of the leaves. Sometimes, the leaves are
shortened to few inches without lamina having malformed
midrib or growth of the leaves ceased to few inches without
malformation giving a de-topped spindle. As the leaves
mature, irregular reddish stripes and specks develop within
the chlorotic areas. Infection in the spindle may reach the
growing point and continue into the stalk (Viswanathan,
2012; Viswanathan et al., 2014b). Upon recovery from the
disease, varying intensities of retardation of internode
growth, bud sprouting and ‘knife-cut’ symptoms on the
stalks are observed.
Sometimes, the growing point is killed leading to
development of top rot. Due to death of spindle, sprouting
of the lateral buds occurs. Most of the PB-affected canes
generally recover from the symptoms but in cases of top
rot recovery is not there. Upon recovery we notice the
normal whorl with remnants of twisted leaf portions of
affected leaves still twisting around the spindle. This disease
is favoured by warm, moist growing conditions. Symptom
development begins early in the rainy season which
normally coincides with rapid and vigorous growth of the
canes. The three to seven months-old are most susceptible
to the disease. Conidia are air borne and are deposited on
plants, then washed by rain into infection sites. Recently
we found that the diseases wilt and PB are caused by the
same fungal pathogen F. sacchari (Viswanathan et al., 2017).
This has added a new finding in epidemiology of the two
diseases caused by Fusarium. It was demonstrated that stalk
infection of F. sacchari  led to foliar infections and vice
versa. Such epidemiological behavior of the pathogen is
also attributed to sudden emergence of PB in different
states.
Leaf fleck
This is a virus disease, lesser known to personnel in
sugar industry and sugarcane scientists. The disease is
caused by Sugarcane bacilliform virus  (SCBV) and occurs
throughout the country. Earlier, the disease was thought to
be confined to sugarcane germplasm but detailed studies
of the author evidenced virus infection in many popular
varieties under field conditions in the country. Major
symptoms of the disease include appearance of flecks or
specks throughout leaf lamina. However, the flecks are
more prominently seen on leaf margins and distal end of
the leaf. Gradually, the chlorotic flecks increase in size, turn
yellow and reddish. In extremely severe cases entire leaf
turns yellow or reddish and symptoms appear close to
yellow spot symptoms. Severe disease expression leads to
premature drying and death of the leaves (Viswanathan et
al., 2019). Such disease severity is noticed in east coast
region in the popular varieties such as CoA 92081
(87A298), CoV 09356 (2003V46), CoV 92102 (83V15) etc.
Foliar diseases
The foliar diseases such as rust, eye spot, yellow spot,
brown stripe and ring spot are air borne and most of them
survive on other collateral and weed hosts. None of the
foliar pathogens are sett-borne. High moisture or relative
humidity following rains accompanied by low or cool
temperatures favours their incidence. During this period,
R. Viswanathan
40 RASSA Journal of Science for Society 4(1)
excess irrigation and non-stripping off their lower leaves
and dry leaves, leading to high relative humidity build up
within the crop. Such microclimatic conditions help to
build up of the disease to epidemic levels. Among the
different foliar diseases, rust has become more severe and
occurs in epidemic form in Maharashtra and Karnataka
during post monsoon season. Almost all the varieties under
cultivation such as CoM 0265, CoVSI 9805, Co 86032, Co
92005, CoC 671, Co 94012, etc were affected by rust. The
newly introduced variety CoM 0265 shows high
susceptibility to brown spot in Maharashtra and Karnataka.
Integrated disease management
The various types of diseases on sugarcane determine
the quality, quality and stability of crop yield. This long
duration cash crop due to its vegetative propagation, high
sugar accumulation and practice of ratooning makes it
easily susceptible to the diseases in the field. Besides this,
wide spread practice of monoculture and heavy wet
condition add to its susceptibility. This unfavourable
environment in host plant invites large number of
pathogens. The pathogens are not only reducing the yield
but also cause the deterioration of the variety due to their
accumulation in the stalk over the time. This phenomenon
is referred to as ‘varietal degeneration’ and this results in
loss of full potential of a variety and subsequently such
varieties are withdrawn from cultivation. In the past and
even today many high yielding, high sugar and popular cane
cultivar like Co 419, Co 740, CoC 671 etc are being
withdrawn from cultivation only because of their high
susceptibility to red rot, smut, grassy shoot and mosaic.
No single method is efficient / available to control
sugarcane diseases due to various reasons hence an
integrated approach involving cultural, chemical/physical
methods, host resistance and legislative measures is
suggested for the sustainable management of sugarcane
diseases (Viswanathan, 2012).
Infected planting materials are responsible for the
primary spread of the disease in the field. Hence, going for
the disease-free setts would reduce the risk of disease
introduction to disease free areas. Lack of awareness on
seed cane health and ignoring quarantine regulations
resulted in introduction of diseases, their epidemics and
varietal degeneration in the country. To increase sugarcane
productivity, supply of healthy seed canes is to be ensured
in the field. As vegetative propagation in sugarcane favours
harbouring of the pathogens causing red rot, smut, wilt,
SCGS, LSD, YLD and RSD in the setts, adequate care
should be taken while selecting seed canes. Since it is
difficult to detect incipient infections of C. falcatum in seed-
pieces, it is recommended to take the planting material from
a disease free crop. Any crop with more than 5% smut or
as high as 2% grassy shoot incidence is unsuitable for seed
purpose. For red rot, if there is any infected clump in the
field, the plot is to be rejected for seed. It is advised to select
always a disease free area to raise the seed crop.
Disease surveillance and diagnosis
Many of the diseases do not cause diagnosable
symptoms on the seed cane and different factors influence
disease expression in the field hence we need to follow
certain diagnostic techniques based on serology or
molecular biology to detect them in the seed cane before
planting in the field. Effort to detect and diagnose
sugarcane pathogens using more advanced laboratory
techniques has been achieved in the past two decades.
Detailed studies conducted over the years at ICAR-SBI,
Coimbatore resulted in standardizing molecular diagnosis
of different pathogens infecting sugarcane. Currently, PCR
assay is used to index sugarcane materials for SCGS
infection and RT-PCR technique is used to index sugarcane
for SCMV , SCSMV and ScYLV infections. These
diagnostics tests have become imperative to raise disease-
free planting materials. Hence tissue culture production
units in the country are utilizing the indexing service from
our lab, which had received accreditation for virus indexing
from Department of Biotechnology, GoI during 2008. The
molecular tests are highly sensitive to detect very low virus
titre in in vitro stock culture or in seedlings.
Since association of two viruses either alone or in
combination in causing mosaic in sugarcane, duplex (D-)
RT-PCR) assays were developed to detect the associated
viruses in a single reaction (Viswanathan et al.,  2008).
Further, the D-RT-PCR was found equally reliable to
uniplex RT-PCR performed with SCMV and SCSMV
primers in separate reactions. Subsequently, a multiplex-
RT-PCR was developed for the detection of SCMV , SCSMV
and ScYLV , three of the major RNA viruses widely
prevailing in the sugarcane growing regions around the
world (Viswanathan et al., 2010). Polyclonal antisera were
produced against recombinant SCSMV coat protein (CP)
and in direct antigen coating (DAC)-ELISA assays, the
Sugarcane Diseases: Diagnostics and Management
https://www .rassa.org.in/online-publications/rjss/ 41
SCSMV-cp antiserum is highly efficient to detect SCSMV
infection in naturally infected / asymptomatic sugarcane
field samples (Viswanathan et al.,  2013a). Further, in
immune-capture (IC)-RT-PCR assays, the same
recombinant antiserum trapped both SCSMV and SCMV
and it was sensitive enough to detect the two viruses causing
mosaic (Viswanathan et al., 2013b). Although DAC-ELISA
is simple and cost effective to diagnose these viruses, in
samples with very low virus titre, IC-RT-PCR would be
more sensitive. Recently RT-loop-mediated isothermal
amplification (RT-LAMP) based assays were developed to
detect sugarcane viruses in the lab without conventional
PCR reactions (Anandakumar et al., 2018, 2020). Lateral
flow immunochromatographic assays (LFIAs) are simple,
rapid and portable detection now popular in biomedicine,
food, environment, and agriculture. Taking advantages of
the new LFIA technology, we developed LFIA for SCMV
and SCSMV detection with a high sensitivity . The gold
nanoparticle-based LFIA assay was found to be
economical and affordable for farmers and is also a
practically feasible diagnostic assay for diagnosing
sugarcane viruses (Muthuramalingam et al., 2022).
Ratoon management
We notice more damages caused by the diseases in
ratoons than plant crop due to different reasons. Inoculum
level of systemic pathogens causing smut, grassy shoot,
LSD, RSD, mosaic etc. gradually increases and results in
severe expression of diseases in a ratoon crop.  Combined
infection of two diseases such as RSD and mosaic or RSD
and YLD adversely affects the crop growth and such effect
is more pronounced in ratoons. Also establishment of
ratoon crop in the field is severely affected by pathogen
infection in plant crops. Similarly, more accumulation of
pathogen in ratoons facilitates acquiring higher virulence
among the pathogens. The popular sugarcane variety Co
419 lost its prominence due to its susceptibility to RSD,
mosaic and YLD. Higher RSD pathogen load favours YLD
and entire foliage become yellowish and slowly crop
degenerates and dries. This situation was found more in
ratoons, due to high pathogen load/vigour. Since multi-
ratooning of sugarcane has several advantages, it is being
followed in many countries. However, to sustain sugarcane
productivity and to improve ratoon productivity these
points are to be given due consideration.
Emerging new diseases
Recently many diseases have emerged as serious ones
in different countries. YL disease has spread to epidemic
form in some varieties. Although mild infections of the
disease do not cause much crop loss continuous use of seed
from such fields lead to severe disease out break. Similarly,
problems of wilt, RSD and SCGS have been ignored in
certain pockets, as there was no previous history of their
severity there. Due to introduction of new varieties or
change in cultivation pattern, minor diseases become
severe. Hence, we have to keep a constant vigil on the
emerging diseases in the region and immediately suitable
management practices are to be taken up to avert future
losses.
Chemical control
Chemical controls are possible for few of the diseases,
particularly those caused by fungal pathogens. Sett rot
pathogen survives in the soil. As a prophylactic measure,
the setts are to be dipped in fungicide solution to protect
the cut-ends from the pathogen. Recent studies at the
Institute revealed that sett treatment of thiophanate methyl
fungicide in combination with biocontrol bacterium
Pseudomonas  reduces soil borne infection of red rot
pathogen surviving in debris. Similarly in case of smut,
propiconazole was found effective and in ratoon crops. Two
sprays immediately after sprouting reduce the disease build
up in the ratoons. If rust is severe, five to six sprayings of
mancozeb (0.2%) between November and March is
recommended to control the disease under our conditions.
Similarly to control eye spot spraying of copper oxy
chloride or Mancozeb (0.2%) once in 30 days during
initiation period is recommended. Whenever the disease
is high, fungicidal application should be sprayed at 18-20
day intervals. Recently detailed studies conducted at the
institute on effective delivery of fungicides in single bud
or two budded setts/ bud chips utilizing mechanized-
vacuum infiltration approach and the treatment has resulted
in more effective diffusion of the chemical into sugarcane
setts / buds due to reduced pressure created in the
treatment chamber. The newly devised sett treatment
device is portable and simple to operate. Recycling of
chemicals resulted in huge savings in chemicals used for
pre-treatment, thus making the system environmental
friendly. Field trials conducted at Coimbatore and red rot
R. Viswanathan
42 RASSA Journal of Science for Society 4(1)
and smut endemic locations revealed that fungicide
delivery through the new device efficiently protected the
crop from these diseases. In addition, delivery of different
agrochemicals for sugarcane multiplication nurseries (bud-
chip or single bud) can be delivered through the device
(Malathi et al., 2017; Viswanathan et al., 2016, 2017).
Use of resistant varieties
The use of resistant varieties is the most important
means of managing sugarcane diseases in a sustainable way.
Although frequent breakdown of sugarcane varieties is a
cause of alarm, new varieties with high to moderate levels
of resistance to the disease are introduced time to time and
saved the crop from severe red rot epiphytotics
(Viswanathan, 2021b). Unlike red rot, smut resistance in
commercial varieties in the field is quite stable. Most of
the ruling varieties are resistant to smut. While advocating
sugarcane varieties to a factory care should be taken that
there should be a proper varietal admixture in that region.
In case of disease outbreaks, the disease spread will be
rapid in case of monocropping as there is no barrier to
check the disease. Also cultivating a single variety in more
than 50 per cent of the area would result in development
of highly virulent strain of the pathogen, which may cause
more damage to the crop than the existing pathotypes.
Heat therapy
The scientific principle involved in heat therapy is
that the pathogens present in seed materials are inactivated
or eliminated at set temperatures not deleterious for the
host tissues. Aerated stream therapy (AST) or moist hot
air treatment (MHAT) is advocated to eliminate sett borne
infections of SCGS and RSD. Any fault in the AST or
MHAT unit may adversely affect the sett germination.
Hence functioning of the heating unit and temperature
control systems, proper volume and circulation of the
heating medium and proper loading of the cane within the
treatment chamber are to be monitored time to time.
Treated setts should always be treated with fungicides
(carbendazim 0.1%) to reduce the entry of soil pathogens
through cut ends. In place of the thermotherapy, meristem-
culture derived seedlings can be used in three tier seed
nursery programme to get disease-free seedlings.
Virus elimination
Since many of the viruses are systemically infecting
sugarcane virus elimination through meristem-tip culture
is being followed in many countries. In vitro culture
techniques employed for virus elimination involve indirect
morphogenesis. Production of ScYLV-free seedlings has
ensured supply of YL-free planting materials to the growers
fields and such fields showed renewed vigour in the crop.
Overall, virus elimination through meristem culture
combined with molecular diagnosis has been demonstrated
as a viable strategy to manage YLD, which occurred in
epidemic form in sugarcane in the recent years. Utilization
of these molecular techniques will be a boon to raise disease
free planting materials for sugarcane plantations. This also
aids maintaining the popular varieties for many years
without degeneration to sustain higher productivity.
Recently we have demonstrated that planting of YL-free
planting materials gives cane yield of 250 tonnes per
hectare in the popular variety Co 86032 in Erode Dt, Tamil
Nadu (Viswanathan et al., 2018).
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
The fungal diseases like red rot, smut and wilt were
responsible for the elimination of many elite commercial
varieties in the past in different epidemics. Additionally
many of the non-fungal diseases contribute to decline in
their performance due to ‘varietal degeneration’. Lack of
awareness on seed cane health and ignoring quarantine
regulations resulted in introduction of diseases, their
epidemics and varietal degeneration in the country. Hence
sugar industry may follow strict quarantine norms when
they bring new varieties from unknown sources or
destinations. This would prevent introduction of new
diseases which are not reported in the region from other
zones or countries. Growing disease resistant varieties is
the mainstay in disease management in sugarcane and
introduction of disease resistant varieties after red rot or
smut epidemics has saved sugar industry during several
occasions. Although YLD has created a havoc to sugarcane
cultivation in the country and SBI has evolved strategies
to manage the disease through meristem culture combined
with molecular diagnosis of the virus. Hence, need of the
hour is to establish YLD-free nurseries in different sugar
mills to reduce disease severity. Wherever appropriate,
conventional seed nursery programme through aerated
steam therapy needs to be followed to reduce severity of
grassy shoot and RSD. Disease surveillance programmes
in the country need further strengthening including use of
remote sensing approach and usage of drones. This would
Sugarcane Diseases: Diagnostics and Management
https://www .rassa.org.in/online-publications/rjss/ 43
lead to creation of disease maps for various diseases in
sugarcane and this would facilitate developing possible
forewarning systems and varietal deployment in a region
in the future. We witnessed outbreak of pokkah boeng and
rust recently in different parts of the country hence there
is a need to create awareness about the potential diseases
which may seriously affect sugarcane production. Hence
the sugar industry should be prepared to tackle minor
diseases when they become major diseases in sugarcane.
REFERENCES
Anandakumar L, Bagyalakshmi K, Muthuramalingam TR,
Nithya K, Parameswari B and  Viswanathan R  (2020).
Reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal
amplification based rapid detection of Sugarcane mosaic
virus  and Sugarcane streak mosaic virus  associated with
mosaic disease of sugarcane. Ind. Phytopathol., 73: 349-358.
doi: 10.1007/s42360-020-00219-w
Anandakumar L, Bagyalakshmi K, Nithya K, Parameswari B
and Viswanathan R (2018). Reverse transcription loop-
mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP) assay for
rapid diagnosis of Sugarcane yellow leaf virus  in
sugarcane. Sugar Tech, 20: 708-716. doi: 10.1007/s12355-018-
0606-2
Bagyalakshmi K, Viswanathan R and Ravichandran V (2019).
Impact of the viruses associated with mosaic and yellow
leaf disease on varietal degeneration in sugarcane.
Phytoparasitica, 47: 591–604.
Malathi P , Viswanathan R and Sundar AR (2017). Mechanized
means of sett treatment: an effective way of delivering
fungicides for the management of red rot in sugarcane.
Sugar Tech, 19: 176-182.
Muthuramalingam TR, Nithya K, Parameswari B and
Viswanathan R (2022). Ultrasensitive nano-gold labelled,
duplex lateral flow immunochromatographic assay for
early detection of sugarcane mosaic viruses. Sci. Rep.,  12:
4144. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-07950-6
Nithya K, Parameswari B, Bertaccini A, Rao GP and
Viswanathan R (2020). Grassy shoot: the destructive
disease of sugarcane. Phytopathogenic Mollicutes,  10(1): 10-
24.
Rao GP , Gaur RK, Singh M, Srivastava AK, Virk KS, Singh
N, Viswanathan R, Patil AS and Jain RK (2000).
Occurrence of sugarcane yellow leaf virus in India. Sugar
Tech, 2(4): 37-38.
Viswanathan R (2002). Sugarcane yellow leaf syndrome in
India: Incidence and effect on yield parameters. Sugar
Cane. Intern., 5: 17-23.
Viswanathan R (2004). Ratoon stunting disease infection
favours severity of yellow leaf syndrome caused by
sugarcane yellow leaf virus in sugarcane. Sugar Cane.
Intern., 22(2): 3-7.
Viswanathan R (2012). Sugarcane diseases and their
management. ICAR-Sugarcane Breeding Institute,
Coimbatore, India, p140.
Viswanathan R (2013). Status of sugarcane wilt: One hundred
years after its occurrence in India. J. Sugarcane Res., 3: 86–
106.
Viswanathan R (2016). Varietal degeneration in sugarcane and
its management in India. Sugar Tech, 18: 1–7.
Viswanathan R (2020). Fusarium diseases affecting sugarcane
production in India. Indian Phytopathol., 73: 415–424. https:/
/doi.org/10.1007/s42360-020-00241-y
Viswanathan R (2021a). Red rot of sugarcane ( Colletotrichum
falcatum Went). CAB Reviews,  16, No. 023, doi: 10.1079/
PAVSNNR202116023
Viswanathan R (2021b). Sustainable sugarcane cultivation in
India through threats of red rot by varietal management.
Sugar Tech, 23: 239–253.
Viswanathan R, Balaji CG, Selvakumar R, Malathi P and
Sundar AR (2017). Epidemiology of Fusarium diseases in
sugarcane: a new discovery of same Fusarium sacchari
causing two distinct diseases, wilt and Pokkah Boeng.
Sugar Tech, 19: 638-646.
Viswanathan R and Balamuralikrishnan M (2005). Impact of
mosaic infection on growth and yield of sugarcane. Sugar
Tech, 7: 61–65.
Viswanathan R, Balamuralikrishnan M and Karuppaiah R
(2008). Duplex - reverse transcription - polymerase chain
reaction (D-RT-PCR) - a technique for the simultaneous
detection of viruses causing sugarcane mosaic. Sugar Tech,
10: 81-86.
Viswanathan R, Chinnaraja C, Malathi P , Gomathi R,
Rakkiyappan P , Neelamathi D and Ravichandran V (2014).
Impact of sugarcane yellow leaf virus (ScYLV) infection
on physiological efficiency and growth parameters of
sugarcane under tropical climatic conditions in India. Acta
Physiol. Plant, 36: 1805–1822.
Viswanathan R, Karuppaiah R, Bagyalakshmi K, Balan S and
Kaverinathan K (2019). Emergence of leaf fleck caused
by Sugarcane bacilliform virus  in sugarcane as a serious
disease under field conditions in India. Intern Sugar J., 121:
146-153.
Viswanathan R, Malathi P , Annadurai A, Prasanth CN and
Scindiya M (2014c). Sudden occurrence of wilt and pokkah
boeng in sugarcane and status of resistance in the parental
clones in national hybridization garden to these diseases.
J. Sugarcane Res., 4(1): 62–81.
Viswanathan R, Malathi P and Naik R (2016). A sett treatment
device for fungal disease management and healthy nursery
programme in sugarcane. Proc. Ann. Con. Sugar Technol.
India, 77: 236-253.
Viswanathan R, Malathi P and Neelamathi D (2018).
Enhancing sugarcane yield per hectare through improved
virus-free seed nursery programme. ICAR NEWS,  24(4):
4-5.
Viswanathan R, Malathi P , Prasanth CN, Naik R and
Annamalai SJK (2017). Sett way of growing sugarcane for
fungal treatment. ICAR NEWS,  23(2): 1-3.
Viswanathan R, Selvakumar R, Geetha N, Balaji CG,
Annadurai A, Pazhani AS, Malathi P ., Sundar AR,
Nithiyanantham R and Manivannan K (2022).
R. Viswanathan
44 RASSA Journal of Science for Society 4(1)
Epidemiology of sugarcane wilt: predisposition by root
borer Polyocha depresella  a myth or reality. Ind. Phytopathol.,
75: 3-14.
Viswanathan R (2018). Changing scenario of sugarcane
diseases in India since introduction of hybrid cane
varieties: path travelled for a century. J. Sugarcane Res., 8(1):
1–35.
Viswanathan, R, Karuppaiah, R and Balamuralikrishnan M
(2010).  Detection of three major RNA viruses infecting
sugarcane by multiplex reverse transcription–polymerase
chain reaction (multiplex-RT-PCR). Austral Plant Pathol.,
39: 1–6.
Viswanathan, R., Ganesh Kumar V , Karuppaiah R, Scindiya
M and Chinnaraja C (2013a). Diagnosis of Sugarcane streak
mosaic virus  using recombinant coat protein antiserum in
sugarcane. Int. Sugar J., 115: 279-283.
Viswanathan, R., Ganesh Kumar V , Karuppaiah R, Scindiya
M and Chinnaraja C (2013b). Development of duplex-
immunocapture (duplex-IC) RT-PCR for the detection of
Sugarcane streak mosaic virus and Sugarcane mosaic virus in
Sugarcane. Sugar Tech, 15: 399–405.
Viswanathan R (2021c). Impact of yellow leaf disease in
sugarcane and its successful disease management to sustain
crop production. Indian Phytopathol., 74: 573–586
DOI:10.1007/s42360-021-00391-7
