Vol. 3 Issue-4, December 2022                                                                (e-ISSN: 2582-8223) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
www.justagriculture.in                                                                
 
 
Page1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstracts:- 
Sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum L.) is the significant cash crop and agri  industrial 
product worldwide. India is the world's largest producer and consumer of sugar, thus it has to 
produce a lot of sugarcane. However, red rot disease is the main threat to sugarcane,  red rot 
disease is also known as cancer disease of sugarcane  it cause severe loss ess in yield and 
quality of  the sugarcane as the fungus Colletotrichum fulcatum responsible for this disease is 
highly variab le in nature. hence it cause the frequent breakdown of resista nt varieties . 
Keeping in the view the seriousness of the disease the present review summerize as the 
distribution mode and source of infection discription of causal pathogen and  integrated 
disease management.Colletotrichum fulcatumPathogen is a facultative saprophytic in nature. 
Keywords: Cash crop, R ed rot, Fungal disease, Colletotrichum fulcatum , F acultative 
saprophyte. 
Introduction:- 
Red rot disease of sugarcane is one of the major and devasting diseases of sugarcane 
crop. Red rot disease also known as cancer of suga rcane, itwas first time reported from Java 
in 1893. In India first time red rot disease reported from Godavari delta of Andhra pradesh in 
1901. The name red rot was given by E. J. Butler. 
Causal organism of red rot :Colletotrichum falcatum 
Teleomorphic or perfect Stage   :Glomerella tucumanensis 
Systemic Position of Colletotrichum falcatum 
Kingdom : Fungi 
Red Rot Disease (Colletotrichum falcatum) of Sugarcane 
and their Integrated Management 
 
Puskar Shukla1*, Anoop Kumar2, Mukul Kumar3, Himendra Raj 
Raghuvanshi4, Arun Kumar5,Pramod Kumar Mishra6 
1*,3,4Department of Plant Pathology, Chandra Shekhar Azad University of Agriculture & 
Technology, Kanpur (U.P)-208002. 
2Department of Plant Pathology, Sam Higginbottom University of Agriculture, 
Technology and Sciences (U.P)-211007. 
5,6Department of Entomology, Chandra Shekhar Azad University of Agriculture & 
Technology, Kanpur (U.P)-208002 
 
ARTICLE ID: 42 
 
Vol. 3 Issue-4, December 2022                                                                (e-ISSN: 2582-8223) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
www.justagriculture.in                                                                
 
 
Page2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disease Symptoms:- 
A Charecterstic symptom for this disese is 
observed in the field during rainy season.  
Disease symptoms appear all aerial part of 
plant, early symptoms appear as leaf 
drooping and losses of their colour, Latter 
the setts are rotten with in and the rind 
losses its natural bright colour become dull 
and shrink at the nodes of sugarcane. Setts are easly breakdown to near the nodes 
comprativially healthy sugarcane setts. In this disease affected plnat leaves (midrib) appear as 
red blood lesion  with dark margin. When infected setts split longitudinaly reddend pith can 
be seen and in severe stage reddening extending vascular bandle to pith. The diseased canes 
juice gives out an alcoholic odour. Acervuli-like black dots emerge close to the nodes. 
 
 
 
 
Phylum   : Ascomycota 
Class : Sordariomycetes 
Order : Glomerellales 
Family : Glomerellaceae 
Genus : Colletotrichum 
Spicies : falcatum 
Fig.no. 2. Infected leaves and stems by Red rot disease of sugarcane 

Vol. 3 Issue-4, December 2022                                                                (e-ISSN: 2582-8223) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
www.justagriculture.in                                                                
 
 
Page3 
Disease cycle and Epidemology:- 
Red rot disease is seed borne as well as soil borne in nature. Infected setts which are 
used for planting are the main source of primary inoculums. During rainy season conidia 
dissemenated through rain water and rain splash that is secondry infection for disease. 
Most favarable condition for disease development  are 29 to 31 degree celcius temperature, 
85 to 100 percent relative humidity, rainy day and cloudy weather and diseae severity 
increased if drought condition occure during the initial groth phase of plant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Integrated Management of Red Rot of sugarcane  
Different employee’s experiences revealed that there is not just one way to control 
sugarcane Red Rot Disease. Consequentlyan integrated strategyis required to control the 
disease. Integrated management programme all the participating organiztion viz. cane reasrch 
institute, extension agencies, factories and farming communities have to involve themselves 
to achieve the disease management successfully in an integrated manner. Among the 
integrated approach's key components are – 
1. Grow resistant variety if available like Co 98015, C o 98016, Co 285, Cos -109, Cos - 
443, Bo. 3, Bo. 32 etc. 
2. Select a field for planting having no history of red rot and field should be well 
drained. 
3. Avoid ratooning the crop. 
4. Use healthy and disease free setts for planting. 
5. Moist hot air treatment of sets at 54 degree Celsius for 2 hrs. 
Fig.No. 3.Disease cycle of Red rot of sugarcane 
Vol. 3 Issue-4, December 2022                                                                (e-ISSN: 2582-8223) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
www.justagriculture.in                                                                
 
 
Page4 
6. Proper water management in the field and quarantine regulation. 
7. Replacement of susceptible varieties as for as possible. 
References: 
Ashwin, N. M. R., Barnabas, E. L., Ramesh Sundar, A., Muthumeena, M., Malathi, P., & 
Viswanathan, R. (2017).Disease suppressive effects of resistance -inducing agents 
against red rot of sugarcane.  European Journal of Plant Pathology , 149(2), 285-
297. 
Hossain, M. I., Ahmad, K., Siddiqui, Y., Saad, N., Rahman, Z., Haruna, A. O., & Bejo, S. 
K. (2020). Current and Prospective Strategies on Detecting and Managing 
Colletotrichumfalcatum Causing Red Rot of Sugarcane. Agronomy, 10(9), 1253. 
Singh, V., Singh, P. N., Yadav, R. L., Awasthi, S. K., Joshi, B. B., Singh, R. K., ... & 
Duttamajumder, S. K. (2010). Increasing the efficacy of Trichoderma harzianum 
for nutrient uptake and control of red rot in sugarcane. Journal of Horticulture and 
Forestry, 2(4), 66-71. 
Viswanathan, R., Selvakumar, R., Manivannan, K., Nithyanantham, R., & Kaverinathan, 
K. (2020).Behaviour of soil borne inoculum of Colletotrichum falcatum in causing 
red rot in sugarcane varieties with varying disease resistance.  Sugar Tech, 22(3), 
485-497. 
 
