
Red rot
of Sugarcane
Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research
Lucknow-226 002
ICAR
Hkkd`vuqi
S. K. Duttamajumder
Red rot of Sugarcane
©  2008 S.K. Duttamajumder. All rights reserved.
Published by :
Director
Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research
Lucknow - 226 002
Printed at : Army Printing Press, 34, Nehru Road, Lucknow-226 002
CONTENTS
Preface i
Acknowledgements ii
List of Plates iii
Chapter 1 : Introduction 1
The sugarcane crop in India 1
Sugarcane plant 3
Saccharum officinarum 7
Saccharum barberi and Saccharum sinense 7
Saccharum spontaneum 8
The story of POJ 2878 9
Chapter 2 : Symptoms 11
Chapter 3 : Loss and Economic repercussions 18
Chapter 4 : Historical background 21
Red rot prior to 1893 25
Mention of red rot in Buddhist literature 25
The “Sereh” in Java and search for new resistance source 27
Red rot epidemic in Godavari Delta and its impact 28
Establishment of Sugarcan Breeding Institute,
The ‘Mecca’ of sugarcane breeding in India 28
Butler and red rot 31
Chapter 5 : The march of red rot in India 36
Red rot research in India on hybrid cane varieties 3 8
Indigo vs Sugarcane 38
The epidemic of 1938-39 and aftermath 39
The epidemic of 1946-47 and breeding for disease resistance 42
Chapter 6 : The Fungus 46
Description of Colletotrichum falcatum Went 46
Physiology and growth 49
Perfect stage - its occurrence and role 51
Chapter 7 : Variability and Race identification 53
Variability is the rule of nature 53
Mechanism of variation 53
Mutation vs adaptation 54
Parasexuality 55
Sexual mechanism 55
Race flora 56
Epidemic : arrival of a new race 59
Light type vs dark type 61
Race Identification 63
Single window testing 65
Chapter 8 : Disease resistance 68
Disease resistance: the rule of nature 68
Horizontal vs vertical resistance 70
Types of resistance 72
(i) Morphological resistance 72
(ii) Physiological resistance/biochemical resistance 7 3
Do the size and type of xylem tissues provide resistance? 76
Breeding for disease resistance in red rot - some reminiscence 76
Inheritance 77
Disease resistant varieties 81
Inoculation techniques 83
Nodal method 83
Internodal method 84
Foliage inoculation 85
Cut cane technique 86
Grading of resistance against C. falcatum 86
Inoculum load 90
Chapter 9 : Epidemiology 91
Life cycle and disease cycle 91
Host-pathogen and environment 93
Spread of the pathogen in the crop 96
Collateral/alternative hosts 99
Soil survival 100
Chapter 10 : Disease management 102
Strength 102
Weakness 103
Opportunity 103
Threat 103
Management of the disease: available options 104
Quarantine 104
Seed selection and field sanitation 104
Physical treatment: the viable option 105
Chemical treatment: a piquant situation 106
Three-tier seed programme: a sound option 108
Chapter 11 : Epilogue 110
Chapter 12 : References 114
LIST OF PLATES
Plate 1 : Life cycle of sugarcane
Plate 2 : The damage potential of C. falcatum
Plate 3 : Mortality of young shoot due to red rot
Plate 4 : Spindle infection of red rot
Plate 5 : Spinde infection (contd.)
Plate 6 : Development of appressoria on leaf surface of sugarcane
Plate 7 : Yellowing of crown leaves
Plate 8 : Symptoms at advanced stage of red rot
Plate 9 : External symptoms on cane
Plate 10 : Internal symptoms of red rot
Plate 11 : Internal symptoms (contd.)
Plate 12 : Nodal rotting and sporulation
Plate 13 : Sporulation on the stalk
Plate 14 : Mid-rib infection or red rot
Plate 15 : Mid-rib infection covering entire leaf
Plate 16 : Development of acervulus in C. falcatum
Plate 17 : Proliferation of hyphae in stalk (white spot)
Plate 18 : Growth of C. falcatum on oatmeal agar (OMA)
Plate 19 : Conidial shape and size
Plate 20 : Conidial development and nuclear condition
Plate 21 : Nuclear condition in conidia (variation)
Plate 22 : Germination of conidia
Plate 23 : Germination of conidia (contd.)
Plate 24 : Appressoria/chlamydospores of C. falcatum
Plate 25 : Transformation of conidia into secondary conidia bearing structures
Plate 26 : Development of acervulus in culture
Plate 27 : Transformation of setae to perform different functions
Plate 28 : Synnamatous development of setae
Plate 29 : Sexual stage of C. falcatum
Plate 30 : Perithecium, asci and ascospores (Glomerella tucumanensis)
Plate 31 : Ascospore-shape, size, nuclear condition and germination
Plate 32 : Hyphal fusion and nuclear migration
Plate 33 : Conidial fusion in C. falcatum
Plate 34 : Nuclear condition and conidial development
Plate 35 : Variation in conidial fusion
Plate 36 : Nodal morphology of cane
Plate 37 : Development of roots in sugarcane
Plate 38 : Parafilm technique of inoculation
Plate 39 : Inoculators and plug method
Dedicated to
all
who bravely faced
the challenges of
Red rot
PREFACE
In the history of Plant Pathology, only a few diseases like rust of wheat,
late blight of potato, ergot of cereals, rust of coffee, brown spot of rice and red
rot of sugarcane have left longstanding impact on food availability which changed
the face of human society. The potato murrain of 1842-45 in Ireland not only
decimated over a million Irish people but also forced a mass exodus of another
million or so to America.
In the Indian context, apart from the rusts of wheat and brown spot of rice,
red rot of sugarcane is the most important disease that affected Indian agriculture
badly with far reaching consequences. It is needless to say that red rot epidemic
of 1938-39, along with brown spot epidemic of rice in 1942-43 augured the
development of Plant Pathology as a subject in the curriculum of Indian
Universities.
Red rot is the key menace of sugarcane in India, and the onus of its
containment also squarely rests on the Indians. In spite of the best efforts, red rot
is still posing challenges in stabilising sugarcane and sugar production. Trough
the concerted efforts of breeders and pathologists, the disease has been contained
to a manageable level and thus, the frequency and magnitude of red rot epidemic
has been reduced to a great extent in recent years. In fact, entire sugarcane
breeding in India is now geared around red rot and no sugarcane variety is
released for general cultivation without resistance to the prevalent pathotypes of
red rot.
In spite of its immense importance in the sugarcane agriculture, hardly any
compilation has been produced so far on red rot except some odd reviews. This
book is a humble effort in this regard to bridge the longstanding gap. Moreover,
this book has been developed as a photo essay on red rot covering many facets of
the host, disease and the pathogen. Errors and failings doubtless remain, and for
these I owe the sole responsibility.
S. K. Duttamajumder
Lucknow
July 2008
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I wish to acknowledge my gratefulness to Dr. Kishan Singh, the then
Director of IISR, Lucknow, who initiated me in the realm of red rot in 1986 and
reposed full faith to carry forward researches on this disease, in spite of my
postgraduate specialization in bacterial plant pathology.  My grateful thanks are
also due to my teachers, who inspired and instilled in me the confidence to become
a ‘Plant pathologist’ and not to get restricted in the boundaries of pathogens.
I am grateful to Dr. R. L. Yadav, the present Director of IISR, Lucknow
for kindly agreeing to publish this effort in the form of a book. His inspiration and
constant encouragement gave me the desired impetus to complete this book in
time.
I also extend my thanks to Dr. D. V. Yadav and Dr. S. K. Gangwar for
their keen interest, encouragement and help.
I wish to record my gratefulness to Prof. Satyavir and Dr. Raman Kapur
for extending their generous support and going through the manuscript critically.
It is my pleasant duty to acknowledge the support provided by my wife in
writing the book. She not only read the book from a layman’s perspective but
also gave critical suggestions in improving the readability and clarity of the
presentation.
Finally, I wish to acknowledge my gratitude to my parents who inculcated
in me the confidence to follow the arduous path of truth ‘it is truth and only the
truth that prevails; one has to have patience and courage to attain the goal’.
S. K. Duttamajumder
Lucknow
July 2008
Introduction 1
1
INTRODUCTION
The sugarcane crop in India
The importance of sugar in human diet needs no introduction; it has become
a part and parcel of daily life. Sugar is produced mainly from sugarcane and
sugarbeet and more than 75 per cent of the world sugar comes from sugarcane.
Throughout ages, sugarcane remained an important commercial crop of
agriculture and trade in India contributing substantial revenue to the exchequer
by way of tax and duties. Today, it is fast transforming into the most sought after
renewable energy crop, as the demand for ethanol is increasing as an alternative
green fuel for the automobile. This has become far more important in the backdrop
of dwindling oil reserves. Currently Brazil is diverting 50 per cent of its sugarcane
for the production of ethanol and blending ethanol with petrol to the tune of 25%.
India is hoping to blend ethanol at least up to 10% in the near future. It has been
estimated that India will need 495 million tonnes of sugarcane by 2025 AD to
meet both sugar and energy demands (Yadav and Duttamajumder, 2007).
Sugarcane is a native of India and has been in use for ‘gur’ making since
prehistoric times. ‘Gur’ was known as early as 3000 BC. The name of the raw
sugar ‘gur’ has originated from the word ‘Gaura’ - a well-known dynasty that
ruled Bengal. The raw sugar produced in Java (now Indonesia) is called ‘Goela’
indicating that the process of gur making had travelled eastward from Bengal to
Java. It is estimated that by 250 BC sugarcane had reached China from India and
by 1 AD it reached the islands of Java (Indonesia). The westward journey of
sugarcane started from India in 327-325 BC with the invasion of Alexander, the
Great. The Greeks termed sugarcane as ‘honey yielding reed’ as they were
unaware of the existence of sugarcane and it was their prized catch. By the 8th
century, sugarcane established itself in southern Europe (Italy, France and Spain).
Introduction2
In 1493, on his second voyage, Christopher Columbus took sugarcane and headed
for the new continent–America. It reached Brazil in 1532 and now in the 21st
century, Brazil has become the numero uno in the world, commanding maximum
acreage and production of sugarcane. Today, sugarcane has established itself as
an important cash crop in the world and around 115 countries are now actively
engaged in growing sugarcane. Among the sugarcane producing nations, India
occupies an important position with respect to cane acreage and cane production.
Due to historical reasons world sugar trade is still governed by the United
Kingdom.
Sugarcane occupies a prized position in the agrarian economy of India.
About 45 million sugarcane farmers, their dependents and large mass of
agricultural labourers are involved in cane cultivation.  Besides, about half a
million skilled and semi-skilled workers, mostly from rural areas, are engaged
in the cane industry, the largest agro-processing industry of India (cotton industry
is the foremost agro-industry of India). In recent times, increasing use of
sugarcane and its by-products in the form of renewable energy source as fuel
blend in petrol driven vehicles, and the production of electricity through co-
generation using bagasse has opened up new opportunities for this crop.  The
area under sugarcane is hovering around 4 million hectares with a production of
240-295 million tonnes of cane with an average productivity of 65-68 tonnes/ha.
Manufacturing of white sugar consumes nearly 60% of the cane produced in the
country; 27% cane is utilized by ‘gur’ and khandsari industries and the rest is
utilized for other purposes such as chewing, juice vending and seed-cane. The
performance of sugarcane, as judged by the acreage it commanded in the last
Table 1.1 Area, production and productivity of sugarcane in India
(Source : Indian Sugar, September 2006)
Period Area 
(million ha) 
Production 
(million tonnes)
 
Productivity 
(tonnes/ha) 
No. of mills in 
operation 
1930-31 1.176 36.35 30.9 29 
1933-34 1.385 53.29 38.5 111 
1940-41 1.617 51.97 32.1 148 
1950-51 1.707 69.22 40.5 138 
1960-61 2.456 110.54 45.0 173 
1970-71 2.615 126.36 48.3 216 
1980-81 2.667 154.24 57.8 314 
1990-91 3.686 241.04 65.4 385 
2000-01 4.316 295.95 68.6 436 
2004-05 3.661 237.08 64.8 400 
 
Introduction 3
four decades, indicates that it has increased from a level of 1.70 million ha in
1950-51 to the level of 4.31 million ha in 2000-01.  The production of sugarcane
has increased from 69.22 million tonnes in 1950-51 to 295.95 million tonnes in
2000-01 (Table 1.1). There is a steady increase both in cane acreage and yield.
Similarly, the numerical strength of the sugar mills has also gone up from 138 in
1950-51 to 436 in 2000-01.
The sugarcane growing area of India may be divided into two broad zones
viz., tropical south and subtropical north, depending on the growing conditions.
These zones are further subdivided, based on cane yield and recovery patterns.
The subtropical region accounts for 60 per cent of cane acreage but only 45 per
cent of white sugar production. Of late, this situation is gradually changing and
contribution to both cane and white sugar is steadily increasing.
Sugarcane plant
Sugarcane, a marvel of the plant kingdom, is an efficient harvester of
solar energy and uses C4 pathway of photosynthesis like maize. It is a tropical
perennial grass and is believed to have originated in Indo-Burma (now Myanmar)-
southern China region extending to Java (now Indonesia). The primary economic
product of sugarcane is sugar, a disaccharide, which on hydrolysis yields two
monosaccharides i.e., glucose (dextrorotatory) and fructose (levorotatory). The
sugar is stored in the parenchymatous tissues of the stalk, and by crushing the
mature stalks, cane juice is extracted. In addition to sugar, the stalk bears bud
and root primordia at the node, and thus is destined to act as the vehicle of vegetative
propagation. The internode (the stalk portion between two nodes) contains the
bulk of disaccharide saccharose (sucrose, sugar), which meets the immediate
requirement for germination of bud and its establishment as a young cane plant
with well developed root and shoot systems. A normal mature cane stalk, at
harvest usually contains about 20-30 effective internodes for crushing. The
vegetative/clonal propagation is used for all commercial purposes, and sugarcane
is planted with stalk cuttings containing bud and root primordia called ‘sett’. Sett
may have one, two, three or more buds but as a general practice, a three-bud
sett is used for planting. The cane stalk used for seed purpose is termed as ‘seed-
cane’. The other feature of sugarcane is the ratoon/stubble crop. This ratoon
crop is raised by allowing the underground buds of the left over stalk to sprout
after harvest and initiate another cycle of crop growth. Sugarcane, like other
grasses, also produces true seeds (a product of sexual reproduction).  The sexual
means of reproduction is of very little direct consequence in the commercial
cane cultivation for propagation of the crop. However, it is of prime importance
to the cane breeders for generating new variability and genetic improvement of
Introduction4
sugarcane. In fact, rediscovery of seed of sugarcane in late 1880s in Java
transformed the face of sugarcane in the world, and today the sugarcane industry
is solely supported by the hybrid canes. Genetically speaking, the present-day
commercial sugarcane is highly heterozygous, complex polyploid, species hybrid
(designated as Saccharum spp. hybrid) harnessing chromosomes/gene
complements from diverse but related genera and species. A conservative estimate
on the chromosome complements of modern sugarcane cultivars has indicated
that 90% of chromosomes come from S. officinarum and rest are from S.
spontaneum and others.
A look at the World Atlas of Sugarcane reveals that in spite of tropical
origin it is successfully grown even 120 beyond the Tropic of Cancer and Capricorn
(23½0 N & S   of the equator; 370N South Spain, 300 S, Natal, South Africa).
However, in any geographical location, prevailing agro-climatic conditions and
edaphic factors influence the duration and the productivity of the cane crop.
Tropical climate permits longer period of crop growth and higher cane yield but
less of sucrose in juice whereas, subtropical climate restricts both growth and
yield but allows more of sucrose accumulation in juice. Usually, growing season
of sugarcane varies from 10 to 12 months in subtropical region and from 18 to 24
months or more in tropical region.
Sugarcane belongs to the genus Saccharum. The word Saccharum owes its
origin to the Sanskrit word ‘sarkara’ or ‘sakkara’ meaning sugar; this became
‘sukkar’ in Arabic and ‘Sakharon’ in Greek.  In 1753, Linnaeus established the
genus Saccharum along with the other crop plants in his master-piece ‘Species
Plantarum’. (Incidentally in 1757, the battle of Plassey was fought, paving the
way for the British colonial rule in India. In 1784, first colonial sugar factory
was established by the British in Bengal). The genus Saccharum is placed in the
grass family Gramineae, sub-family Panicoideae and tribe Andropogoneae.
Traditionally, six species have been recognised in the genus Saccharum viz.,
S. officinarum, S. barberi, S. sinense, S. robustum, S. edule and S. spontaneum.
Due to frequent intermixing (cross fertile/sexually compatible nature of sugarcane
with the recognised species and allied genera) among the related species in nature,
there was always some doubt about the distinctiveness of these recognised species
(Parthasarathy, 1946). Irvine (1999) considered only two species in the genus
Saccharum - the wild species S. spontaneum and the cultivated species
S. officinarum. The rest of the four species viz., S. barberi, S. sinense, S. robustum
and S. edule have been placed as the natural hybrids of S. officinarum and
S. spontaneum. Probably such natural crossing took place around 1000 BC.
The growth pattern of sugarcane crop may be divided into five distinct
phases viz., (i) germination (sprouting of axial bud of stalk cuttings; gives rise to
Introduction 5
a mother shoot), (ii) tillering (underground buds of young mother shoot grow to
form daughter shoots), (iii) grand growth (the period of stalk elongation, a quantum
jump in the height of the crop), (iv) maturity (accumulation of acceptable level of
sugar in juice), and (v) flowering. The optimum temperature for germination of
bud is about 250C. In subtropical India, in spring planted crop, germination usually
takes place within one month of planting and may take another two weeks to
complete (1½ months). Tillering starts after germination phase and continue for
next two months. In this phase, from the mother shoot, new daughter plants
(tillers) develop and increase the shoot population. Usually this phase switches
over to the grand growth phase (GGP) with the arrival of monsoon in subtropical
India. The monsoon months usually constitute the period of grand growth - with
the availability of abundant rain and humidity along with favourable temperature
and sunshine hours, the compressed cane stalk developed during summer months
suddenly takes up the vertical growth and starts increasing in leaps and bounds
(through elongation). Incidentally, this is the phase of the sugarcane crop (GGP)
when the red rot pathogen flares up and takes a heavy toll. Usually, in subtropical
India, a sugarcane produces about 50 buds/stalk in a crop cycle of 12 months.
About 10-15 buds/stalk are usually left in the soil after harvesting of plant cane,
and these stubble buds, on germination, give rise to a ratoon crop. Similarly,
10-15 buds always remain immature at the young nodes of crown leaves, and
these are left out. Of late, these buds constituting the ‘shoot tip’ are being used in
micro-propagation. Thus, the economic/millable portion of the stalk (millable
cane) usually has 20-30 buds or internodes. Sugarcane is a typical tropical plant
and requires an ambient temperature of 24-300C, enough sunshine and adequate
water and humidity for growth. The affinity of sugarcane for water was aptly
paraphrased “ Sugarcane loves water but doesn’t tolerate wet feet ” by
Sir Venkatraman.  A temperature around 10-150C is suitable for maturity and
peak accumulation of sugar. A temperature below 50C is harmful to the crop and
it does not tolerate frost.
In any plant system, maturity of vegetative phase leads to the reproductive
phase, and sugarcane is no exception. Depending on the availability of day length,
moisture and temperature, sugarcane switches from vegetative to reproductive
phase. Floral development is initiated by shortening of day length. The apical
growing point of the stalk produces the flowers in an inflorescence. The
inflorescence (tassel) of sugarcane is also called arrow (Plate 1 a, b) and so the
flowering is also termed as arrowing. For all commercial purposes (except the
cane breeding), the arrowing is taken as a bad character, as like most of the
members of Gramineae, flowering also sounds the impending bell of death for
the plant. In sugarcane, most of the stored sucrose is gradually utilized in the
process of flowering and seed formation. The inflorescence consists of a main
Introduction6
axis, and first, second and third order branches. Spikelets are arranged in pairs
(Plate 1c). The sugarcane flower consists of three stamens (pollen is very short
lived having half life only 12 min after dehiscence) and a single carpel with a
feathery stigma (Plate 1d). Flowers take two to three months to mature after
initiation.
In India, flowering in sugarcane takes place during October to December
(Coimbatore condition). It will not be out of place to mention that many of the
Saccharum officinarum clones available in the world collection of sugarcane
germplasm do not flower (probably due to the selection for non-flowering at the
hand of aboriginals, who grew these at their kitchen garden). These noble canes
therefore could not be further exploited commercially through conventional
breeding. The mature seed of the sugarcane is termed as fluff/fuzz (Plate 1f)
due to the tuft of hairs (callus hair) attached to the tiny seed for aerial dispersal.
Mature fuzz consists of the mature dry fruit (caryopsis), glumes, callus hairs,
anthers and stigma. The superfluous parts of the inflorescence are generally
handled, stored and sown with the seed because it is not practical to separate
them. The seeds do not have any resting period and germinate immediately to
produce tiny grass like plants (Plate 1 g, h). The seedlings differ from the common
grasses in the tactile response and appear a bit stout on touch.
Table 1.2 Important temperatures in the life of sugarcane
Temperature (
0C) Behaviour of sugarcane 
62 Heat adapted seed cane survives in water (20 min) 
54 Hot air treatment of seed cane (8h), Moist hot air treatment (2½ h)  
52 Hot water treatment (30 min) 
50 Hot water treatment (2h) 
40-45 Average summer temperature in subtropical India 
24-30 Average growing season (Grand growth phase) 
This is the temperature when red rot flares up 
25 Optimum for germination 
<18.3 During photo-induction, flowering is prevented  
<17 Pollen sterility, if occurs during microsporogenesis 
10-15 Suitable for maturity and accumulation of sugar 
<8.5 Buds and setts fail to germinate 
<5 Frosting and reduction in sugar recovery 
0 Cold chlorosis 
-2.8 Young cane plants die 
-3.5 Terminal buds and mature stalk die 
-5.5 Entire above ground portion is killed  
-11 Underground portion is killed 
 
Introduction 7
Saccharum officinarum
This is the type species of sugarcane. It is identified and is best represented
by thick-stemmed, colourful, soft and juicy sweet canes. It has never been found
in the wild. Available clones of this species were part of the kitchen gardens of
primitive tribes in the Melanesian islands who used these canes for chewing.
Owing to the majestic appearance and quality, the Dutch settlers in Java named
the cane of their choice as ‘noble cane’. Noble canes got different names in
different countries like Creole, Otaheite, Lahaina, Badila, Black Cheribon, Fiji,
Ashy Mauritius, Red Mauritius, etc. It is an octoploid (2n=80), with a basic
chromosome number of x =10. Before the advent of hybrid varieties in the 20th
century, pure cultivars of S. officinarum served the sugar industries around the
globe. However, these genotypes off and on suffered badly from the attack of
various pests and pathogens and thus, necessitated frequent replacement of
planting material from disease/pest free area/region/country. S. officinarum was
present in India from the prehistoric times; however reintroduction of this type
of cane took place in a regular fashion. Like, Major Sleeman (based in Jabalpur)
introduced this type of cane from Mauritius in 1827.
Saccharum barberi and Saccharum sinense
The famous thin-stalked north Indian canes, mostly used for jaggery (gur)
making, were studied in detail by Barber (1916, 1918). He separated these into
five groups, based on morphology of stem, leaf and root. These groups are
Sunnabile, Mungo, Nargori, Saretha and Pansahi. The Chunnee, Kansar (S.
barberi) and Uba (S. sinense) are well known due to their utilization in the early
cane breeding programmes of both Java (Indonesia) and Coimbatore. Both Barber
and Jesweit were of the opinion that the barberi type has arisen from S. spontaneum
through the process of mutation and selection. The sinense type was brought to
India from China by the East India Company around 1796 and was received by
Roxburgh, who treated it as a new species and named as S. sinense. The clones
of these groups, in general, possess deep root system with good tillering habit
Table 1.3 Sucrose content in the genus Saccharum
Sucrose % (fresh weight) Species of  
Saccharum 
No. of clones  
evaluated Range Mean ± SD 
S. spontaneum 40   1.3 -   6.5   3.96 ± 1.48 
S. robustum 10   3.9 - 11.7   7.83 ± 2.67 
S. sinense   2 13.1 - 13.9 13.45 ± 1.01 
S. officinarum 25 15.0 - 20.2 16.05 ± 1.12 
 (After Bull and Glasziou, 1963)
Introduction8
and are moderate in girth and weight, medium in sugar, high in fibre, and well
adapted to the biotic and abiotic stresses of the subtropical conditions.
With the publications of Irvine (1999), D’ Hont and Glaszmann (2001) and
D’ Hont et al. (2002) providing further supportive molecular evidences confirmed
the hypothesis that the so called north Indian and Chinese canes, in real terms,
are the natural hybrids of S. officinarum and S. spontaneum. These natural hybrids
have established themselves under the guidance of evolutionary pressure exerted
by the prevailing conditions of subtropical India and China. The S. barberi type
was evolved to withstand the harsher biotic and abiotic stresses prevalent in
subtropical India. Obviously, the nature has favoured the hardy thin canes with
good root system in the evolutionary process. These natural hybrids were selected
and reselected so much in the past that traditional taxonomists placed them as
new species. The sinense type, that flourished in China, is cold tolerant, whereas,
the barberi type that thrived well in the harsher climate of subtropical India is
tolerant to drought. In addition, these canes possess ample resistance to ward off
various pests and diseases. Probably, due to this hybridity, no immediate success
was obtained by Barber and Venkatraman in their initial effort at the very
beginning of Sugarcane Breeding Institute (SBI), Coimbatore.
Saccharum spontaneum
S. spontaneum, the Kans, is well known for its wide variability and
adaptiveness to diverse climatic and edaphic conditions. It exists throughout the
length and breadth of Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia (China, Taiwan, Japan,
Indonesia, Philippines, and New Guinea) and in parts of Africa.  It is a
polymorphic species and diversity ranges from annual to perennial type with
both sexual and asexual reproduction taking place freely. Many forms are highly
rhizomatous; rhizomes growing to several metres even. In general, the group as
a whole possesses pithy stalk and hardly any extractable juice. Tillering is profuse,
and in general, they exhibit marked resistance to moisture stress, low temperature
and many of the diseases and pests. Chromosome numbers vary from 2n=40 to
128 (x =8, most frequent count, 2n=64). Meiosis in S. spontaneum is generally
normal with bivalent formation, regardless of the chromosome number. It will
be interesting to note that chromosome number in S. spontaneum varied widely
depending on its geographical distribution. A gradual increase in chromosome
number is observed from India to Java (Himalayan form 2n =56; Bihar 2n=64,
72; Assam 2n=80; Burma 2n= 96; Java = 112, 120, 128). It is often assumed
that the forms bearing higher chromosome number have originated from the
forms bearing lower chromosome number.
Introduction 9
The story of POJ 2878
Early sugarcane breeders realized that the resultant F1 progeny of
S. officinarum and S. spontaneum was distinctively different from either of the
parents. When S. officinarum clones were used as the female parent, progeny
tended to be taller stalked, higher in sucrose level, and generally more vigorous
than when S. spontaneum clones were used as the female parent. Reciprocal
difference in vigour was attributed to ‘2n+n’ transmission in S. officinarum
(female) x S. spontaneum (male) cross combination. This phenomenon of irregular
transmission was termed as ‘female restitution’ by Bremer. The present day
successes of sugarcane dates back to the early part of the 20th century when
active use of this species with noble cane (S. officinarum) yielded the much-
desired tolerant hybrids at the two main centres of cane breeding i.e., Java
(Proefstation Oost Java) and India (Coimbatore). In fact, these spectacular hybrids
provided desired fillip to the sugarcane and sugar industry worldwide (POJ 2878
in Java, Co 205, Co 213 in India, POJ 213 in USA), which were plagued with
‘Sereh’, red rot and mosaic. No doubt, in the history of agriculture these events
remained path-breaking achievements (use of wild species in the improvement
of crop plant, harnessing of hybrid vigour, a quantum jump in acreage of the crop
and yield) and ushered the ‘first green revolution’, both in India and elsewhere in
the early part of 20th century. Due to the development of POJ 2878 alone, Java
became a sugar surplus country in no time. In the history of sugarcane breeding,
the Javan variety POJ 2878 stands out as a major achievement. Both as a
commercial variety in its own merit and as a parent of many commercial varieties,
it has established a remarkable record (Mangelsdorf, 1959). The genotype POJ
2878 was first raised in 1921 and by 1929, it established itself as the ruling variety
of Java, surpassing all previous records. The breeding history of POJ 2878 is
highlighted here as an example of utilisation of wild species in the development
of disease resistant cane genotypes. The ‘Sereh’ which was plaguing sugar industry
of Java was a boon in disguise; it forced a comprehensive study of sugarcane–its
breeding, diseases and the various management options. To name a few, like
rediscovery of fertile seed of sugarcane, heat treatment of cane, discovery of
diseases like red rot and leaf scald, development of hybrids and use of other
related species in breeding are the most significant. The development started
with the collection of Kassoer (a natural hybrid of unknown noble cane and unknown
Glagh, S. spontaneum) from near the base of Tjerimai volcano in Java in about
1890. Similarly, POJ 100 was developed from an open pollinated tassel by Wakker
Introduction10
in 1893 (Mangelsdorf, 1959). Miss Wilbrink, the pathologist who first reported
leaf scald disease, tried her hand in producing clones resistant to ‘Sereh’. By
crossing POJ 100 as female and Kassoer (was resistant to Sereh) as male parent
she obtained POJ 2364 in 1911. POJ 2364 inherited immunity to ‘Sereh’ from
Kassoer but its sucrose content was too low to qualify as a commercial genotype.
In 1912, the young Jeswiet joined the staff of Proefstation Oost Java as sugarcane
breeder. In 1917, he crossed POJ 2364 with EK 28 (popular noble cane variety
of Java). In 1921, he from 32 tassels grew 2266 seedlings, one of which received
the number POJ 2878, the wonder cane of the world. It yielded 35% more than
its predecessor and put a new lease of life to the ailing Javan sugar industry.
Later, POJ 2878 became the most sought after parent, giving birth to several
successful sugarcane varieties of the world.
In spite of the spectacular success of early hybrids, one finds the involvement
of only a handful of S. spontaneum in the parentage of present day sugarcane
cultivars. In the past 100 years of cane breeding, due to inherent difficulty in
crossing, obtaining viable seeds and selection of desired type in the progeny always
remained a major bottleneck in the effective utilisation of the veritable gene
goldmine, the S. spontaneum, available in India. Newer findings on the origin
and taxonomy of different species of Saccharum acknowledge the pivotal part
played by this species in stabilizing S. officinarum progenies in the harsher sub-
tropical environment of both India and China. Obviously, the progenies that could
tolerate the onslaught of red rot and wilt pathogens survived, and naturally, these
were selected for ‘gur’ making. However, spread of these genotypes was
restricted, especially in U.P., due to prevalent attitude towards the flowering of
cane. In common folklore, flowering of sugarcane was taken as a curse and it
foretold the death of the head of the family. In the area where cane was grown,
the sight of flowering was obstructed by the servants. Early in the mornings,
servants made a round of the cane crop and if any sign of flowering was noticed,
it was immediately destroyed.  Watt (1893) had also mentioned this in his book
on Economic products of India and he wrote, “…if cane flowers and seen by the
head of the family, divine curse will surely befall on him and death is foretold.”
Probably due to this reason, sugarcane farmers over the generations preferred
non-flowering types.
Symptoms 11
2
SYMPTOMS
The pathogen, Colletotrichum falcatum Went, can attack any part of the
sugarcane plant; be it stalk, leaf, buds or roots. C. falcatum completes its life
cycle on the sugarcane leaf and usually the damage to leaf does not pose a serious
threat to cane or cause much harm to the plant. The most damaging phase of this
disease occurs when the pathogen attacks the stalk. Depending on the age of the
stalk, time of infection and susceptibility of the cane genotype, it produces different
types of symptoms. The typical stalk symptoms i.e., presence of white spots in
otherwise rotten (dull red) internodal tissues and nodal rotting appear when the
crop is at the fag end of the grand growth phase during August-September in
subtropical India. In the early stages of infection, it is difficult to recognise the
presence of the disease in the field, as the plant does not display any external
symptom or distress. At a later stage, some discolouration of rind often becomes
apparent when internal tissues have been badly damaged and are fully rotten.
This is more pronounced in the stalk of light coloured genotypes (Plates 9a, 38 b,
c). At the end, affected plant dies. At the field level, this may be observed as the
death of a few plants or clumps to the failure of entire crop (Plate 2).
The infected cane setts carry the primary infection to the field. Depending
on the nature of infection and availability of favourable environment, pathogen
starts taking toll by killing the bud. This affects the germination and initial
establishment of the crop. Poor germination leads to a gappy crop stand and
reduction in yield. If, at all, the buds of the infected setts are able to sprout and
grow, then above ground symptoms appear. The type of symptoms varies
depending on the prevailing weather conditions. At first, symptoms appear as
the death of young and emerging shoots (Plate 3a, b) without any conspicuous
identifiable symptom (in March-April-May in north Indian condition, spring
Symptoms12
planting). Occasionally spindle infection also apears with heavy sporulation.
However, in ratoon crop spindle infection appears much earlier (Plate 3d). The
dying symptoms are often confused with the damage of young shoots by rats /
termites, especially in the ratoon crop. However, a close microscopic examination
of these dying shoots, if affected due to red rot reveals the presence of fruiting
structures of Colletotrichum falcatum in the form of acervuli and chlamydospores
in the leaf folds (Plate 6a, b, c). Occasional spindle infection showing heavy
sporulation also appears in the emerging leaf (sett inoculation, adequate moisture).
With the passage of time, if the infected shoots survive, one encounters tiller
mortality (Plate 3c). This is just the extension of death of mother shoots due to
primary infection. Thereafter, the spindle infection (Plate 4a, b, c, d) appears
and its frequency is more during the onset of monsoon and gradually the frequency
tapers. Spindle infection was also observed during the 1938-39 epidemic of red
rot (Chona, 1942) and in the epidemic of Godavari Delta (Barber, 1901), as
evident from the furnished drawings and photographs of different symptoms.
However, at that period this type (spindle infection) of infection was taken as the
mid-rib infection in young crown leaves. Spindle infection contributes significantly
in the spread of the disease. Experiments conducted at IISR, simulating spindle
infection by inoculating young mid-ribs with the hypodermic syringe (damaging
the epidermal layer and placing the inoculum simultaneously; heavy sporulation
appeared on the mid-rib in 7 days) showed that July inoculations are more potent
in spreading the disease (through secondary spread) to the adjacent clumps than
the inoculations carried out in late August/September (Duttamajumder and Misra,
unpublished observation). The spindle infection is characterized by the infection
reaching the crown from the stalk portion, affecting the unfolded leaves quickly.
At this time C. falcatum hardly proliferates in the stalk tissues and quickly reaches
the crown. The spindle infection essentially starts from the primary inoculum
present in the sett. However, such symptom frequently develops in nodal
inoculations (Parafilm method). Generally, infection traverses from the sett to
the stalk without producing any conspicuous damage or reddening of the stalk
tissues and finally reaches the crown where it expresses itself. On the way it
may occasionally express and damage the leaf sheath (Plate 5c). Only one or
two odd discoloured vascular bundles indicate the path which C. falcatum followed
during its passage through the immature stalk. On the crown leaf, it starts from
the base as water-soaked elongated lesion (oval, eye shaped), usually at the abaxial
side (back side) of the mid-rib (Plate 4a, b). On the leaf lamina, it also produces
elongated lesion surrounded by a yellow halo (Plate 5a). In three to four days,
these water soaked lesions turn light brown and eventually become dark coloured
due to the bearing of abundant setae and spore masses (Plate 5b, d). Sporulation
Symptoms 13
on this spindle infection is very fast, and in a week’s time, millions of spores
(conidia) are formed, whereas in case of mid-rib infection it takes more than a
month to sporulate. In the damaged unfolded leaves of the crown, abundant
chlamydospores are also formed (Plate 6a, b, c). The spindle infection is also
one of the very characteristics of this disease, which one can identify very easily
in the field due to its typical appearance. Further, presence of abundant setae
(Plate 5d) gives a prickly feeling on touching, and thus helps its confirmation.
Spindle infection is a confirmatory symptom of red rot like internal rotting with
white spot. Occasional spindle infection also develops in artificial inoculations
(plug method), especially when inoculation is done in the early phase of crop
growth — especially during July.
The characteristic symptoms, as described in textbooks, appear as the
grand growth phase progresses accompanied with sufficient stalk formation. This
starts with the yellowing of one or two leaves of the crown (Plate 7a). The third
or fourth open leaf, being the most prominent leaf of the crown attracts one’s
attention (which is incorrectly written as the yellowing of 3rd or 4th leaf as the first
appearance of the disease in many writings). There is no hard and fast rule of
yellowing of a particular leaf. The yellowing as well as withering of leaves starts
from the margin. Later on, the entire crown becomes light orange yellow and
dries (Plates 7b, 8a, b) . External symptoms of stalk rotting appear as
discolouration of rind. This is more pronounced in light coloured type (Plates 9a,
38b, c). At this time, if the stalk is split open longitudinally, the typical red rot
symptoms as described in the literature become visible in the internal tissues
(Plate 10a,b, c, d). Reddening of the internal tissues interspersed with white
patches (white spots), which are usually at right angle to the stalk axis, along
with the presence of sourly alcoholic smell confirm the disease. Probably, these
white spots in the internodal tissues of cane stalk act as the inn, where the pathogen
safeguards itself from the host defences (Plate 9a, b, c). The pathogen detoxifies
the phenolic compounds from a portion of the cane tissue for a comfortable stay
in that area. In highly susceptible genotypes, the border of white spot is
indistinguishable with the background tissue, whereas in moderately susceptible
genotypes the white spot when present is definitely surrounded by a dark red
zone. Isolation from white spot area invariably yields virulent and sporulating
form of C. falcatum. In fact, in the white spot area, tissue damage is most
prominent and the tissues are usually devoid of cell contents and filled with air
and web of fungal hyphae (Plate 17a, b, c, d). When the stalk tissues with
prominent white spots are allowed to dry, the white spot area becomes sunken,
indicating greater moisture loss and tissue degradation of this particular area
(Duttamajumder, unpublished observation). The redness of the internal tissues
Symptoms14
of the cane is due to the phenolic compounds, which are invariably produced due
to any type of injury/invasion. However, the intensity of accumulation of the
phenolics varies depending on the host-pathogen combination. Colletotrichum
falcatum has taken this host defence in its own stride to avoid competition from
other microorganisms that follow suit.
Reddened or discoloured vascular bundles run through the internodes in a
characteristic manner in early symptoms (spindle infection). During the early
phase of crop growth one or two odd discoloured vascular bundles provide the
quick transit route to the pathogen for reaching the crown. The fungal hypahe run
along the vascular bundle, rarely venturing out in the parenchymatous tissues. At
this time, no white spot or internal reddening, as seen in the typical symptom
(August/September), develops and the pathogen hardly spreads sideways in the
internode. In the late stage, when ambient temperature goes down, pathogen
again restricts itself to the vascular bundles. However, the vascular bundles are
definitely red and occasionally the pathogen ventures out in the surrounding
internodal tissues, sometimes giving the appearance of serial spotting.  Serial
spotting also develops due to the passage of conidia through the vascular bundles,
proliferating at different sites. This situation specifically arises in plug method of
inoculation, wherein a large number of conidia placed at the damaged end (due
to boring of a hole in stalk) of the vascular bundles are taken up due to upward
transpiration pull. Another peculiar situation is often encountered if inoculation
is carried out using plug method during the colder months (October & November,
low ambient temperature). It has been noticed that due to proximity of inoculation
point to the ground, maturity of cane and unfavourable ambient temperature,
there is a certain tendency of C. falcatum  to traverse more towards the bottom
of the cane from the inoculation point in comparison to that of the normal period
(July, August inoculation). As the inoculation is just at the third internode from
the base of the cane, C. falcatum tries to reach the stool base, as if looking for
relatively warmer condition for survival. However, the response is not uniform
among the genotypes and the relative frequency also varies from year to year.
The sourly alcoholic smell in the badly affected tissues is due to the
preponderance of acetic acid bacteria that enjoy the hospitality of Colletotrichum
falcatum. With further progress of the disease, death of the cane takes place. It
is important to note that sporulation usually appears after the death of the plant
(formation of acervuli, the asexual fruiting structures). These appear externally
on the root primordia (Plate 13f, g, h), and on the stomata present on the stalk
and at any conceivable area where the pathogen finds or is able to create an exit
point (Plate 13a, b, c, d, e) and internally in the cavities formed in the stalk
Symptoms 15
(Plates 10d, 11b, c).  It is to be pointed out here that sporulation is blazingly fast
on cut or damaged portion of the diseased cane. Once the diseased cane is cut, a
good amount of sporulation appears on the cut surface even in an overnight
incubation, provided the cut surface does not dry up.
The other important point that is quite characteristic of this disease is the
rotting of the node. This nodal rotting also kills the bud and root primordia and
renders the node unfit for germination and establishment. This typical nodal rotting
helps to differentiate red rot from wilt (Plate 11b, d), wherein the buds remain
unaffected and retain viability. Moreover, it is the nodal tissue, which the
C. falcatum has to overcome first to establish itself in the standing cane (natural
infection). Until and unless the pathogen possesses the capability to damage the
nodal region, it gets little chance to infect internodal tissues of the stalk in nature.
In the nodal rotting, however, the vascular bundles running through the node
remain largely unaffected, only the other connecting tissues are preferentially
attacked (Plate 12a, b). Sometimes in some cane genotypes, the cane breaks
from the damaged node (growth ring) and topples the crown down. Through
artificial inoculation, Duttamajumder and Misra (2004) have shown that
C. falcatum can enter through the immature internode via stomata present on the
stalk. After the entry, it quickly reaches the node (up or below), growing along
with the vascular bundles, just below the epidermis, without displaying any
conspicuous symptom. In the nodal tissues, pathogen consolidates itself and then
spreads to the new areas of the stalk. It has also been shown that through these
portals C. falcatum invariably comes out and produces acervuli bearing conidia
and setae on the surface of the stomata (Plate 13a, b, c, d, e). Like many other
members of Colletotrichum affecting different crops, C. falcatum hardly pushes
away the epidermis of the stalk for the production of acervulus underneath; rather
it takes the route of any available avenue, be it natural or artificial.
The other most important phase of the disease is the infection on leaf mid-
rib and leaf lamina. C. falcatum produces reddish lesions on the adaxial (dorsal)
surface of the mid-rib (Plate 14a, b, c, d). The lesions gradually increase in size
and may elongate up to the entire leaf mid-rib (Plate 15a, b). Aging/old spot
develops ashy white centre where the pathogen produces acervuli laden with
conidia and setae (Plate 14c, d). The mid-rib lesions, for a long time have been
taken as the chief source of inoculum for causing infection in the standing cane
stalk, as indicated earlier. The spindle infection was also taken as mid-rib infection
and thus, resulted in conflicting claims regarding the capability of mid-rib isolates
in infecting stalk. Thus, it added some confusion about the role of mid-rib infection
in the spread of the disease. The inoculum that causes spindle infection is
Symptoms16
essentially a stalk infecting isolate, which passes through the cane stalk and
expresses on the crown leaves in the early phase of the crop growth and helps in
the spread of the pathogen. Incidentally, infection in the crown was also common
in the red rot epidemic that hit Godavari Delta (Barber, 1901) and in the epidemic
of 1938-39 (Chona, 1943). However, later workers have found that actual mid-
rib isolates hardly possess the capability to infect the stalk and have concluded
that genes governing leaf susceptibility and stalk susceptibility are different.
Duttamajumder (2002) arrived at the inference that the leaf population of
C. falcatum is the major population, which thrives well in nature, and the stalk
population is the aberrant population like the dacoits/rogues/ mercenary of human
society who have acquired the nuisance value. The mid-rib population is the
reservoir, silently contributing to the development of virulent pathotypes, most
of which fizzle out due to their lack of fitness. Only, a few are able to muster the
capability of stalk infection and thus, able to proliferate in cane stalk. This initial
stalk infection becomes sett-borne and unleashes a fresh onslaught on the cane
genotype. The mid-rib infection usually starts appearing in the pre-monsoon phase
(in June in subtropical belt). However, it is not clear which type of inoculum is
responsible for the initiation of mid-rib infection early in the crop season.
Nevertheless, the mid-rib infection never puts any discernible effect on the cane
plant in terms of juice quality and yield. Several trials conducted at IISR (Anon.
1953-2005) and elsewhere with different fungicides as well as removal of affected
leaves by various workers did not yield any dividend, and therefore, it has been
concluded that the mid-rib population of C. falcatum does not pose any serious
threat to cane cultivation directly.
The third type of infection that affects the leaf is termed laminar infection.
On the lamina, numerous tiny reddish lesions appear on the adaxial surface of
the leaves and sometimes the lesions are devoid of any red or dark colouration
(Singh and Alexander, 1970). Later on, at the infection site, acervuli are formed,
especially on the dying/dead cane leaves. Laminar infection is often encountered
in fields where sugarcane breeding experiments are carried out and a large number
of cane genotypes with varying resistance/susceptibility to C. falcatum is usually
grown. The most inconspicuous symptom and which is mostly overlooked is that
of perithecia formation (symptom of perfect state). The symptoms appear just
after the rains (Chona and Bajaj, 1953), and it may easily be seen in the month of
August in north India when ambient temperature is around 25-260C and intermittent
rains provide the requisite relative humidity for the development of sexual
structures (Duttamajumder, 2002). Asci are initially seen as tiny black dots present
between the two veins on the abaxial side of the mid-rib of a dying leaf
Symptoms 17
(Plate 29a, b, c). Later on such black dots, (perithecia) produce asci and
ascospores (Plates 30a, b, c, 31a, b, c, d), which come out through the ostiole
(Plate 29d). The conspicuous absence of imperfect state (along with the perfect
state) in most of the cases casts some doubt of its accurate identity. Only the
observation of the ascospores and their germination (Plate 31e, f, g, h) behaviour
confirms the identity. Sometimes development of sexual stage has also been
observed in nature during March with the availability of required humidity and
ambient temperature (Duttamajumder unpublished).
Another phase of the disease, i.e., cane/sett-rotting phase at planting, which
was common in USA during first quarters of 20th century, is not frequently
encountered in India. In Louisiana, planting takes place in September-October
and during the harsh winter, the above ground parts die due to frost and ice. The
underground cane becomes more vulnerable and easily gets damaged by root
rotting fungi including Colletotrichum. Edgerton and Moreland (1920) described
it in detail. They observed that in such conditions C. falcatum spreads very rapidly
in the cut cane. Affected tissues in the setts of the susceptible variety become
slightly reddish and later take various shades of red, brown, greyish white. White
spots sometimes develop but are not as prominent as seen in the standing stalk in
the field. Usually the tissues of infected cut stalks deteriorate quickly. Infected
setts, while more or less inactive in the soil, are frequently overrun by secondary
rotting organisms and this often makes identification of the disease more difficult
in the field.
The condition of the node due to red rot infection needs some explanation.
As indicated earlier, the node is the focal point for secondary infection of red rot
in the field and C. falcatum has to overcome this barrier of nodal tissues to set
foot in the cane successfully. In susceptible varieties, all of the internal tissues of
the nodes appear affected but with the Parafilm method of inoculation, it has
been found that vascular bundles of the nodes retain their identity whereas the
sclerenchymatous tissues are destroyed exposing the vascular bundles
(Plate 12a, b). As the disease progresses, the internal tissues change in colour
from the normal white to shades of red, brown or greyish white. At the other
end, nodes of the resistant varieties remain free, except occasional passing of
red vascular bundles and that too in cases of artificial inoculation with plug method.
Varieties with limited nodal rotting are usually considered somewhat resistant.
Duttamajumder and Singh (1999) have introduced the evaluation of nodal rotting
in the grading system of Srinivasan and Bhat (1961). It has also been observed by
various workers that C. falcatum stays alive longer in the nodal tissues, in
comparison to that of the internodal tissues.
Loss and economic repercussions18
3
LOSS AND ECONOMIC REPERCUSSIONS
From the time of Went, red rot has been recognised as a disease that can
cause serious losses. The losses vary depending on the susceptibility of the variety
and also from place to place. It is taking some toll every year. Serious epidemics
have occurred, at times in different countries like USA, West Indies, Formosa
(now Taiwan), Australia, and South Africa besides the Indian subcontinent.
No doubt, the disease occasionally assumed annihilating proportion in the
past, yet very limited information is available with regard to the extent and
magnitude of losses caused by this pathogen. Losses can be of two types viz., (i)
Direct loss and (ii) Indirect loss. Direct loss starts from the very beginning. The
presence of red rot in seed-piece often leads to germination failure and thereby
affects the total number of millable canes (NMC) and yield. The gappy stands
provide opportunity for the weeds to grow and compete with the cane for nutrition
and space and this accounts for most of the indirect losses. The setts, carrying
the primary infection to the field, depending on the intensity and location of
infection, exercise different effects on the cane plant. The appearance of the
disease in the form of infection reaching the spindle (spindle infection) provides
necessary inoculum for the quick spread of the pathogen. In favourable
environment, this plays havoc; damages the crop, reduces the number of millable
canes (NMC) and yield.
As the C. falcatum extensively grows in the internodal parenchymatous
tissues, chemical composition of the juice is bound to change. Changes in the
sucrose and glucose content in the juice from the red rot affected canes were
first observed by Went. He reported that the increase of the glucose and reduction
of sucrose content were due to the inversion of sucrose. Butler later confirmed
the observation of Went and further pointed out that the damage is due to the
Loss and economic repercussions 19
Table 3.1 Changes in juice caused by red rot pathogen in sugarc ane
genotype CoL 29
(After Singh and Waraitch, 1981)
inversion of sucrose and not the actual consumption of sugar by the fungus. Later
on, it has been confirmed by various workers that invertases play a major role in
the breakdown of sucrose.  At the beginning of the disease expression, even a
full-blown red rot affected cane possesses ample sugar. There is little drop in
sugar content in the red rot affected cane, until and unless the cane starts drying.
Depending on the extent of damage and duration of affliction, juice extraction
percentage, purity percentage, total soluble solid in the juice as well as sucrose
content go down. However, there is a substantial increase in gum content and in
the content of titrable acidity in juice. It is also known that juice from red rot
affected canes, when used for sugar making does not crystallize well and thus
affects recovery and thereby the sugar production.
The main indirect losses are due to the imposition of severe limitations of
growing high sugar, high yielding sugarcane genotypes that easily fall prey to this
disease. Currently, as a standard practice, no sugarcane genotype is released in
India until and unless it possesses resistance against the prevailing red rot flora
of the target region. Greater emphasis for breeding disease resistant cane
genotypes forfeits the chance of many excellent ones with low level of resistance,
Parameter Days after inoculation Healthy Diseased 
15 16.47 16.17 
45 18.34 17.29 
90 18.15 14.34 
Sucrose (%) 
Mean 17.59 15.93 
15 0.44 0.74 
45 0.26 0.54 
90 0.24 0.99 
Reducing sugars (%) 
Mean 0.31 0.67 
15 87.90 85.40 
45 88.70 83.10 
90 84.80 53.70 
Purity (%) 
Mean 87.10 74.10 
15 7.54 9.92 
45 7.33 11.24 
90 8.14 13.52 
Titrable acidity (cm 3 0.1 N NaOH) 
Mean 7.67 11.56 
15 2.23 2.82 
45 2.52 3.23 
90 2.64 4.00 
Gums (%) 
Mean 2.46 3.35 
 
Loss and economic repercussions20
and thereby substantially increases the developmental cost of any sugarcane
variety. Further, frequent failure of cane variety against the onslaught of red rot
pathogen adds insult to the injury. Such failures of a variety in field especially
when it has acquired reasonable acreage, hit hard both the farmer and the sugar
industry, as both have to bear the loss and the burden to replace the affected
genotype to check the disease as well as to sustain sugar production and remain
competitive.
Sugarcane is also used in many areas as green fodder for the cattle,
especially when a scarcity of green fodder arises. The damaged cane hardly has
any green top left for its use as fodder and cattle avers to take dry cane leaves.
However, feeding of diseased sugarcane plants to the cattle did not make any
perceptible change in the cattle behaviour.
The available data on the quantum of damage is sometimes quite misleading.
The damage depends on the period (month) of artificial inoculation, prevailing
ambient temperature and moisture availability and finally the aggressiveness of
the pathotype used for such study. These discrepancies have become more apparent
in different publications. One such is highlighted in Table 3.1. As it is known that
in a highly susceptible-virulent pathotype combination, the cane starts drying
within one month of inoculation (plug method) with concomitant drop in sucrose
content in the juice. The drop in one unit of sucrose at the end of 45 days of
inoculation in a highly susceptible genotype like CoL 29 is not at all acceptable;
however, the data furnished for 90 days are usually encountered in 30-45 days in
most of the susceptible-virulent pathotype combinations as estimated by various
researchers. At 90 days, the cane simply dries out and hardly any juice is left to
carry out such estimations.
Historical background 21
4
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
“A historical knowledge of one’s own branch of science, however profound, is no guarantee
against the making of new mistakes in a new situation. But history also shows that it is
only too easy to make the old mistakes in a recurrent situation that a thorough acquaintance
with past work could have taught us to recognize.” - Garrett,  S.D., 1959.
The prophetic remark of Garrett aptly outlines the chequered history of
red rot. Over and over again, pathologists of different genre have made similar
mistakes in similar situations due to a lack of proper understanding of the disease.
This situation was partly due to the non-availability of seminal literature at one’s
disposal (at one place), and partly due to the haste in having a quick-fix solution.
Red rot, though prevalent in India since time immemorial, drew the attention of
the scientific community only when FAFC Went chance encountered this malady
in Java. He was deputed to Java (now Indonesia), to investigate the notorious
‘Sereh’ disease, which was threatening the sugar industry of Java in 1880’s.  In
search of the cause and cure of ‘Sereh’, Went stumbled upon a situation of cane
dying in 1892 at the Tjomal estate in Java, and in the following year (1893) he
published an account of this problem of stalk rotting of sugarcane plants and thus,
this sugarcane disease came to light in the scientific world.
He studied the malady, and described the causal fungus as Colletotrichum
falcatum Went and named the disease as “het rood snot”, meaning red smut.
Obviously, the name ‘red smut’ is not a happy one as ‘smut’ is caused by an
entirely different group of fungi and produce remarkably different type of
symptoms. The species is named ‘falcatum’ due to its typical falcate/sickle shaped
conidia (Plates 19, 21). The accepted name, ‘Red rot’ was given to this cane
disease in 1906 by Sir E. J. Butler, the celebrated Imperial Mycologist of India,
who was then working at Pusa, Bihar. He wrote the first major account of this
disease in 1906. It was by sheer chance that just after three years of Went’s
Historical background22
report, in 1896 Spegazzini, from the other side of the globe (Argentina), reported
the ascigerous stage (perfect stage) of this fungus and named it Physalospora
tucumanensis Speg. He did not mention the nature of its imperfect stage (conidial
state). The specific epithet “tucumanensis” was assigned after the place Tucuman,
where the Sugarcane Research Station was situated. Almost half a century later
Carvajal, one of the students of Edgerton from Louisiana State University
established a link between these two stages. As they described :
“Early in March 1941 an ascigerous stage was produced upon sterilized cane leaves
in test tubes 10-20 days after inoculation with conidia from pure culture of C. falcatum
and during May and June 1941, the perithecial stage was produced again by inoculating
leaves of standing cane in the green house. The perithecial stage was first found in
the field in July 1941 on dead and drying leaves previously inoculated.”
In 1944, they published a detailed account of their findings in the journal
Phytopathology (Carvajal and Edgerton, 1944).
After the first report to the scientific world from Java (now Indonesia),
the disease was reported from many sugarcane growing countries of the world.
The prominent countries were West Indies, India, USA and Australia. In the
same year, Massee (1893) also isolated the same fungus (Colletotrichum falcatum)
from specimens of cane received at Kew Gardens from West Indies. The report
of Massee was quite confusing and the identity of the disease was jumbled up
with the rind disease (Melanconium sacchari = Phaeocytostroma sacchari). It
was left to the systematic work of Howard (1903) to prove that the disease in
question in West Indies was actually caused by Colletotrichum falcatum Went
and the infection by the ‘rind disease’ fungus followed the injury by C. falcatum.
In the mainland U.S.A., Edgerton observed the presence of the disease in 1908,
and reported it in 1910 (Edgerton, 1959). Lewton-Brain (1908) also observed this
disease in Hawaii. In India, the discase was first reported by Barber (1901).
Initially, the major work on this disease and pathogen was carried out in
two main centres i.e., India and USA. The Indian work resulted in the detailed
description of the disease and its epidemiology by Butler in his publications of
1906, 1913 and 1918. The American work led to the publication of a comprehensive
technical bulletin in 1938 by Abbott. Unfortunately, in the same year i.e., in
1938, red rot rocked the Indian subcontinent in a big way and engineered an
epidemic on an unprecedented scale in the popular interspecific hybrid cane Co
213, pushing sugar factories of Eastern Uttar Pradesh and Northern Bihar on a
ruinous course. Though the march of red rot in the hybrid canes was started with
Co 210 in 1932, the 1938-39 epidemic year was the watershed year in the history
of red rot in India. A reduction of 70,000 tonnes of sugar production in the country
was attributed to the red rot epidemic. This epidemic was a major jolt to the
Historical background 23
popularity of the hybrid sugarcane as well as to the fast expanding sugar industry
that got a boost after the withdrawal of differential tariff. The red rot epidemic
of 1938-39 and the epidemic due to brown spot of rice in 1942-43 (The Great
Bengal Famine) in Bengal and wheat shortages due to rust in 1946-48 infused the
requisite impetus to the progress of Plant Pathology in India.  For the first time,
Plant Pathology, as a full-fledged discipline, stood on its own in India shedding
the restrictive folds of Botany.
It is to be borne in mind that during the early phase of sugarcane
development in India, sugarcane was mainly grown in the subtropical region.
The first sugar factory was established in 1784 in Bengal. The second factory
was established in 1791 in Bihar (then a part of Bengal Province). Sugarcane
industry as a whole faced several ups and downs, and in the 150 years of its
existence in India, it could hardly muster 29 mills in operation by 1931. Out of
1.176 million hectare of sugarcane, 80% was the share of subtropical north zone.
In 1931, Govt. of India introduced tariff protection barrier against the imported
sugar from Java. It will not be out of place to mention that the spectacular success
of sugarcane industry of Java (Indonesia) was due to the development of the
hybrid POJ 2878, which later on ruled the world directly as a popular cane variety
and as a much sought after parental stock in breeding. The number of sugar
factories rose from 29 in the pre-protection regime to 111 within two years (Table
1.1) and to 134 by 1936-37 producing 11 lakh tonnes of white sugar as compared
to mere one lakh tonne prior to 1932.  It was soon realised that with the increased
number of sugar factories, the requirement of sugarcane also increased several
folds, which in turn could not be met with the thin indigenous types, even though
it commanded maximum acreage. The thick officinarum types did not survive
well under subtropical environment of northern India. The spectacular success
of the new hybrid sugarcane drew the attention of all and sundry and everybody
who had any chance to lay hand on these new hybrids, put them in cultivation.
Thus, the seed consciousness took a back seat, and every single stick of hybrid
cane available at that time was planted to encash the new opportunity. This
indiscriminate spread of cane varieties provided the undesired impetus to the red
rot pathogen to make inroads in the cane crop. Thus, both the farmers and the
industry had to pay a heavy price for this single folly at the hand of C. falcatum.
Before 1960s, the entire subtropical belt of India was mostly dependent on
the cane varieties bred at Coimbatore (with the prefix Co) but with the advent of
new sugarcane research stations in this region with emphasis on in situ selection
of cane genotypes in the target area itself, the share of exclusive Co canes has
gradually declined in these areas. The locally selected varieties are now
commanding maximum acreage. However, Coimbatore still remains the focal
Historical background24
Table 4.1. Varietal spectrum of sugarcane in the service of sugar industry
in subtropical India
Period Prevalent cane genotype 
Before 1918 Hemja, Katha, Khakai, Pathri, Saretha and noble canes 
1920-1930 Co 205, Co 210, Co 213, Co 214, Co 223, Co 281, Co 290 
1930-1940 
Co 205, Co 213, Co 223, Co 244, Co 281, Co 285, Co 290, 
Co 312, Co 313 
1940-1950 Co 213, Co 312, Co 313, Co 331, Co 356, Co 453 
1950-1960 Co 312, Co 313, Co 453, Co 951, CoS 245, CoS 510 
1960-1970 Co 312, Co 975, Co 1107, Co 1148, BO 17, CoS 510 
1970-1980 Co 312, Co 1148, Co 1158, BO 17, CoS 510 
1980-1990 Co 1148, Co 1158, Co 7717
, BO 91, BO 99, CoJ 64, 
CoS 687, CoS 767 
1990-2000 Co 1148, Co 1158, Co 7717, BO 91, BO 120, CoJ 64, 
CoJ 85, CoS 8436, CoS 767, CoS 91269, CoLk 8102, 
CoSe 92423 
 
point of breeding cane varieties as the National Hybridisation Garden (NHG)
has been established there, and every cane breeder visits this ‘Mecca’ for
crossing. Varieties selected at the U. P. Council of Sugarcane Research,
Shahjahanpur (also established in 1912) are now having the largest acreage in
this region.
A closer look at the varietal scenario of sugarcane in subtropical India in
different decades after the development and release of first hybrid Co 205 is
given in Table 4.1.
It is on record that Co 213, which was badly affected by red rot in 1938-39,
commanded 1.4% of the acreage even after a decade of its failure (Table 4.2).
Farmers in unaffected areas continued to grow this variety in spite of high risk of
crop failure due to red rot. They were not willing to discontinue this variety, as a
suitable replacement was not readidy available. This was due to the low seed
multiplication rate in sugarcane (1:8-10), which hinded quick replacement. Only
a few varieties commanded a significant acreage for a longer duration. In the
subtropical India, Co 1148 is one such variety that dominated the scene commanding
more than 45% of the cane acreage. However, in tropical India, the wonder
cane, Co 419 at certain point commanded more than 90% area. Varietal diversity
in the subtropical belt is much wider than that of the tropical belt. Obviously, red
rot is playing a decisive role in this regard.
Historical background 25
The hybrid cane variety, though started replacing the thin canes belonging
to Saccharum barberi  and S. sinense  from 1920s, even at the time of
independence, these old varieties continued to have a major share in cane acreage
in subtropical India. Their acreage drastically reduced in 1950s (Srivastava, 1993).
These varieties in general were tolerant to red rot. However, on artificial
inoculations many of these varieties showed high degree of susceptibility (Abbott,
1938; Chona, 1954).
Red rot prior to 1893
From the description of Watt (1893) in the “A Dictionary of the Economic
Products of India”, it was quite apparent that red rot was prevalent in India and
was affecting the canes throughout the length and breadth of the country, wherever
noble canes (Saccharum officinarum) were planted.
Mention of red rot in Buddhist literature
Red rot, as was thought by many workers in the past, is not really an
introduced disease in India. On the contrary, one also finds its mention in the
Buddhist literature (Deerr, 1949; Daniels and Daniels, 1976). The disease was
so prevalent in the sugarcane growing belt of eastern Uttar Pradesh and Bihar
(where Gautam Buddha started preaching after enlightment) that Lord Buddha
used the description of the devastating effect of this disease on sugarcane to
prevail upon his followers. Deerr (1949) concluded that ‘this mention’ of the
disease of sugarcane appeared to be the earliest record of a sugarcane disease
and his passage is quoted below. (The contention of the earlier workers that red
rot is an introduced disease in India is not appropriate; however, the pathogen
has got repeated chance of introduction in India along with the noble canes from
Table 4.2. Area(%) occupied by major sugarcane varieties in subtropical
India
Year of varietal census 
Variety 
1941-42 1948-49 1952-53 1959-60 1965-66 1970-71 1975-76 
Co 213 16.5 1.4 0.1     
Co 312 21.2 33.0 28.7 24.7 22.6 3.0 1.2 
Co 313 10.3 10.6 14.5 8.6 1.9 1.4 0.4 
Co 453  6.0 14.0 3.4 2.0   
CoS 245   3.1 11.3 1.3 1.5  
CoS 510    9.9 5.6 3.5  
BO 17    2.7 9.8 13.3 8.6 
Co 1148     1.3 23.4 39.5 
Co 1158     0.3 9.0 17.7 
Others 52.0 49.0 39.6 39.4 55.2 46.3 32.6 
 
Historical background26
countries like Mauritius, Java, Burma (Myanmar), Barbados, etc. The red rot
epidemic of 1895 in Godavari Delta may have received the inoculum from the
introduced cane).
“Mahaprajapati, the foster-mother of Rahula, Gautama’s son, requested the  Buddha
to allow women to enter an order of nuns. After a first refusal, she followed him
from Kapilavastu to Vesaili and, arriving footsore and weary, again urged her request.
In this she was supported by Ananda, the favourite disciple of Sakya Muni, who at
last relented, but with the statement.”
“Just as when the disease known as manjitthika%% falls on a field of ripened sugar-
cane, that field does not last long, even so, Ananda, in whatever discipline of Dhamma
women are allowed to go forth from the home to the homeless life, that godly life will
not last long.”
%%(Deerr’s footnote) “The word Manjitthika means, ‘colour of madder.’ Madder or
manjit is native to, and still used as a dye in India. It affords the deep red dye known
as Turkey red. The most widespread cane disease is that known as ‘red rot,’ caused
by the fungus Colletotrichum falcatum. At the time of writing, it is very prevalent in
the area where Buddha came to this decision. A feature of the disease is that often it
only makes itself manifest when the cane is ripe for harvest. It does not seem
unlikely that this is the very disease referred to by Buddha, and that the passage
forms the first mention of a cane disease.”
Daniels and Daniels (1976) have given more supportive evidence for the
presence of red rot in India from the Chinese literature. They suggested a working
hypothesis that
“... the centre of origin of noble cane, S. officinarum could have been in the Terai
region of North-east India (Assam), but that the presence of red rot disease, to which
it is susceptible, prevented this area from becoming the centre of diversity.”
It is quite natural that red rot was prevalent in India from the very beginning
of the sugarcane cultivation. Probably for this reason, the so-called north Indian
canes (S. barberi) are in general tolerant to red rot. These canes are essentially
thin canes with narrow leaves with good tillering habit. The pure S. officinarum
canes were also grown in pockets with much care and used for chewing purposes,
and in some religious ceremonies. With the advent of sugar industries, cultivation
of sugarcane in the mill command area increased several folds and this paved
the way for large scale cultivation of S. officinarum canes due to good sugar,
tonnage and extraction (softness). Increase in acreage of officinarum canes, along
with cultivation practices that prevailed under the sugar mill command area,
favoured the proliferation of red rot pathogen. C. falcatum attacked the crop off
and on, leading to the abandonment of the affected genotype. Thus, it necessitated
frequent introduction of officinarum type cane from disease free area (district,
state, country) to sustain the sugar industry.
Historical background 27
The “Sereh” in Java and search for new resistance source
It was only through calamities that threatened the very existence of the
sugar industry, the progress in the knowledge of sugarcane and its cultivation
usually took place. The outbreak of  “Sereh” in Java in 1880s, being one of the
greatest calamities that ever befell the sugar industry has proven to be one of the
greatest blessings, since it led to such an extensive study of sugarcane, and
especially of methods of cane breeding, thus wrote Earle (1928) in his famous
book ‘Sugar Cane and its Culture’. The disease ‘Sereh’ was of prime importance
in Java. In ‘Sereh’, vascular bundles and the tissues of the nodes turn red, the
internodes fail to elongate normally and all of the lateral buds sprouts, resulting
in a worthless bushy stool resembling some big grass. For this reason the disease
is called ‘Sereh’ - the local name for one of the big Andropogons.
A historical event of great importance in sugarcane is the rediscovery of
the fact that sugarcane sometimes produces fertile seed, and that new varieties
may be produced by growing these seeds. Modern interest in the subject dates
from the rediscovery of fertile seeds in Java by Soltwedel in 1888. To overcome
the menace of ‘Sereh’ in Java, Mr. R. D. Kobus (he also introduced heat treatment
for disease control in sugarcane) from Java Sugar Industry visited India in search
of resistance and took a number of sugarcane genotypes including “Chunnee” (S.
barberi) along with him on his return voyage. S. officinarum x S. barberi crosses
were initiated for the first time in Java by Kobus in 1897 to transfer the disease
resistance character in the thick noble canes. The “Chunnee” proved to be immune
to “Sereh” but was of no immediate use commercially in Java due to both low
sugar and low tonnage. However, this “Chunnee” ushered in a new era of hybrid
canes and the use of different species of the genus Saccharum in the improvement
of sugarcane.
Watt (1893) wrote :
“In the report of the Botanic Gardens of Saharanpur (Uttar Pradesh) for the year
ending March 1891, mention is made of the visit of Mr. R. D. Kobus, a Dutch
gentleman, who had been sent to India by the Government of Java in order to secure
stock of Indian varieties of sugar-cane. Mr. Kobus explained that the sugar cane had
been attacked in Java by a disease supposed to be of fungoid nature, which threatened
to extinguish the sugar cane industry there. Mr. Kobus recognised all the paunda
forms (the class specially grown in India to be chewed) as the same as the cane
grown by the Dutch in Java for sugar manufacture. The ek or ganna canes (the class
specially grown in India for sugar making) were, he said entirely new to him. These
are very much more hardy than the paunda canes and accordingly, Mr. Kobus took
back with him a large supply of these and was hopeful that he had thus secured a
stock that might prove able to resist the disease.”
Historical background28
Red rot epidemic in Godavari Delta and its impact
Large-scale mortality of sugarcane was noticed in the Godavari Delta
(Ramachandrapuram taluk of Andhra Pradesh), then a part of Madras
Presidency, due to an unknown disease in the last decade of 19th century. Two
varieties namely “Namalu” and “Keli”, then largely grown in the Godavari
Delta, were affected by the disease (In some publications the affected variety
was wrongly mentioned as Red Mauritius, whereas ‘Red Mauritius’ was one of
the resistant varieties that replaced the affected ones). The situation aggravated
further in the Godavari Delta and by 1895, it shook the backbone of the sugarcane
farmers. Because of this malady, regular cane area was reduced from about
2500 ha in 1895 to about 500 ha by 1899. The plight of the farmers forced the
person, in charge of the taluk, to seek help from state machinery to find out the
cause and provide necessary solution to this problem, so that the native ‘gur’ and
sugar industry could be saved. In March 1900, Government of Madras introduced
sugarcane cuttings from Hospet (Bellary district, Karnataka), where the disease
was rare, but this did little good. Mr. C. A. Barber, the then Economic Botanist
of Madras Presidency was accordingly deputed to make a thorough investigation
of the crop and the disease.
In his report, dated 24th April 1901, he ascribed the reason of sugarcane
crop damage to a fungus named Colletotrichum falcatum Went (Barber, 1901).
In the report, he further pointed out that an intensive study was necessary into
both local practices and characteristics of different varieties against this fungus
before any such introduction or acclimatisation was attempted. Based on his
recommendations, about five hectares of land was taken on lease in 1902 at
Samalkota (Andra Pradesh), and several varieties, obtained both from different
parts of India and abroad were screened (Barber, 1906). Later on, the area
became popular as Samalkota farm. At that time varieties like Red Mauritius,
Gillman sport and 247B were found tolerant to red rot. In fact, Red Mauritius
was one of the tolerant varieties that effectively replaced the affected local varieties
in the red rot ravaged area of Godavari Delta. The major supply of seed-cane of
variety ‘Red Mauritius’ was obtained from the erstwhile state of Bhopal.
Establishment of Sugarcane Breeding Institute, the ‘Mecca’ of sugarcane
breeding in India
“With the outbreak of the Great Fire in 1666, the city of London was pract ically
gutted but the dreadful disease plague ravaging the city disappeared and the proud
metropolis of the world developed.”
The outbreak of “Sereh” in Java in 1880s, being one of the greatest
calamities that ever befell the sugar industry has proven to be one of the greatest
Historical background 29
blessings, since it led to such an extensive study of sugarcane, and especially of
methods of cane breeding, identification of various cane diseases like red rot,
leaf scald, management of sugarcane crop, use of heat treatment, etc. (Earle,
1928). Similarly, the occurrence of red rot in an epiphytotic form in the Godavari
Delta caused serious irrecoverable loss to the farmers but resulted in the initiation
of an extensive search for resistant/tolerant varieties (at Samalkota). It ultimately
led to the establishment of the Sugarcane Breeding Institute (SBI), Coimbatore in
1912, and to the development of indigenous interspecific hybrids of sugarcane
which assured the prosperity of sugarcane farmers in India and abroad
(Prasadarao, 1987).
Thus started the Sugarcane Breeding Institute (then a research station) at
Coimbatore in 1912 with only two persons on roll viz., Mr. C. A. Barber as
Sugarcane Expert and Mr. T. S. Venkatraman as his assistant who accompanied
him from Madras. The Institute was the first in the world to attempt at evolving
suitable sugarcane varieties for the subtropical sugarcane growing belt of the
country, the other two then existing institutions in Java and Barbados being solely
devoted to developing varieties for tropical condition. Faced with this onerous
task, the duo attempted to cross the tropical sugarcane S. officinarum with the
indigenous varieties in cultivation in subtropical north India, classified later as
S. barberi. This work, carried on for a few years, was not successful. While in
a dejected mood, sometime in 1914-15, Venkatraman noticed the wild species of
sugarcane, S. spontaneum (Kans) on the channel bunds adjoining the Institute, in
profuse flowering and the idea flashed in his mind ‘why not to give it a try’ in
breeding to evolve the much needed hardy varieties for the subtropical belt. Again,
for the first time in the world, the idea of utilising a wild species for improvement
of cultivated crops was thought out, which has now become a common practice
in many crops (Prasadarao, 1987). Incidentally, the first batch of hybrid-sugarcane
varieties came out in 1918; the year Mr. T. S. Venkatraman took charge of
Coimbatore station after the retirement of Dr. Barber. Due to the spectacular
success of the hybrid sugarcane varieties, Venkatraman was knighted in 1942 by
the then Imperial Government. His Excellency, Viceroy of India, Lord Irwin
visited Coimbatore in 1927 and he was so impressed with the work carried out
there that he remarked “I have not so far seen anything so wonderful as this” and
asked everybody working on sugarcane to visit this ‘Mecca’ and to emulate the
path of Mr. Venkatraman.
This solitary event ultimately laid the foundation of the first Green revolution
in the world. With the acumen and zeal of Sir T. S. Venkatraman, the first ‘Co’
hybrid Co 205, a progeny of S. officinarum (Vellai) x S. spontaneum (Coimbatore)
came into being in 1918. It became an instant success in the red rot ravaged area
Historical background30
of subtropical India particularly in the Punjab, where it recorded 50 per cent
more yield than the indigenous varieties (like Katha) in cultivation. The other
interspecific hybrid genotypes like Co 213, Co 244, Co 281, Co 285, Co 290, Co
299, Co 312, Co 313, etc., followed suit and provided the requisite fillip to the
ailing Indian Sugar Industry, which was suffering badly due to differential tariff,
making Indian sugar dearer in London market. Within the decade (in 1927),
Coimbatore bred variety (Co 285) reached American shore for cultivation. Later,
NCo 310 became the true international variety (crossed at Coimbatore, selected
at Natal, South Africa and became the main cane variety of many countries,
including USA). As a testimony to this success of hybrid sugarcane, during the
9th ISSCT Congress in 1956, it was decided to pay tribute to the first commercial
hybrid sugarcane variety by erecting a monument in the place where the genotype
Co 205 was spotted.
Before the advent of the interspecific hybrids, red rot was ravaging most
of the introduced noble canes in the sugarcane mill zones and thus, was putting
enormous pressure on the profitable existence of the mill. These newly bred
hybrid cane varieties brought the necessary respite from this unstable situation.
However, the boom of hybrid sugarcane crop did not last long, and in 1938-39,
an unprecedented red rot epidemic engulfed eastern Uttar Pradesh and northern
Bihar shattering the backbone of sugar industry in this region.
Historical background 31
BUTLER AND RED ROT
The entry of Sir Edwin John Butler at Pusa, Bihar and the first comprehensive
work on red rot in India
Dr. Butler, a trained medical man, came to India and joined service in
1901 as the Cryptogamic Botanist to the Govt. of India in Calcutta and he was
attached to The Botanical Survey of India.  In 1902, the section in which Butler
was posted was transferred to Dehradun as a part of the Dept. of Agriculture,
Govt. of India. With the establishment of India’s premiere research institute on
agriculture at Pusa, Bihar, his department was again shifted there. Butler,
working as Imperial Mycologist at Pusa, published the landmark research paper
on sugarcane diseases of Bengal in 1906, which contained detailed description of
red rot. In this paper he wrote :
“The history of the usual outbreak is somewhat as follows. A concrete example
studied in 1902 is selected being typical of the rest. In this case, about the beginning
of August several fields separated from one another by distances of about half a mile
showed obvious signs of the disease. The diseased field had all been planted for the
first time with a yellow cane of the Bourbon type, the seed cane for which had all
been obtained from one locality. Other varieties of cane growing in close proximity
to the diseased ones were not attacked. The following season (1903) this localisation
of the disease to only one of the several varieties of cane growing on the estate was
still more marked. Wherever the yellow Bourbon of the diseased stock was planted,
disease broke out, while none of the other varieties was affected. Even in neighbouring
villages to which the seed had been distributed, and where cane had not previously
been grown, disease appeared.
The external appearance and progress of the disease as seen on this estate and
elsewhere are very characteristic. The upper leaves of a shoot, usually one approaching
maturity (and therefore rich in sugar), begin to lose colour and droop slightly. Then
they wither at the tip, and the withering progresses down the margins leaving the
centre green. The top leaves were not usually first affected but the third or fourth
from the unopened tip, these being the most prominent leaves of the cane. Later the
whole crown withers and droops. At this stage, there is no visible alteration in the
cane itself, and the withering does not differ from that due to drought, except that
withered and green canes are commonly seen arising from the same stool. When one
cane of the stool shows the disease, the whole stool is invariably, though often
slowly, destroyed.
On splitting open a cane, in the early stages of the disease nothing abnormal can be
found in the upper portion. As the base is reached, however, the tissues are found to
be reddened in one or a few of the lowest internodes. This discoloration appears first
in the vascular bundles, which show as red dots or streaks, and then extends to form
blotches; finally, much of the cane pith is reddened. Whitish areas are often to be
seen, due to the occurrence of groups of dead cells containing air.
Historical background32
In many instances, however, such as that figured, definite red blotches with a white
centre transversely elongated are found in the internode, which, when present, are
characteristic of the disease; this appears to be more or less general in certain
outbreaks such as that described by Mr. Barber in Madras.
As the disease progresses, large patches can be seen with every stool destroyed. By
the end of the season, little or nothing of the original cane is left. In this respect the
outbreak in bad cases causes the most complete destruction of cane.”
He also traced the life history of the fungus Colletotrichum falcatum Went,
as it occurs in nature and in artificial culture and I quote:
“In the living cane, the microscope reveals it as an irregular network of fine colourless
filaments ramifying in and through the cells of the pith. These filaments are so like
those of many other fungi that their presence alone tells nothing of the nature of the
parasite. One peculiarity, however, they possess, that within them can be seen numerous
little bright globules which are probably droplets of oil. Spores are not ordinarily
produced until the cane dries up, and their formation and further details of the life
history can best be studied in artificial culture.
The spores of Colletotrichum are produced within two days in cultures obtained as
described above, by cutting out a part of the diseased tissue under aseptic conditions,
or generally in any culture on living cane material. It is a simple matter to obtain
sterile slabs from the interior of living healthy canes by the same method. These
should be incubated for a couple of days to test the absence of other organisms. On
dead, boiled cane slabs, boiled cane extracts, gelatine, dextrose-gelatine, agar-agar
and other nutrient substances, … spores are often not produced within this period.
A culture examined on the second day shows the following appearance. The filaments
of the fungus extend in a whitish fluffy mass from the surface of the slab. Spores are
first seen produced slightly on short lateral branches. They arise at the tip of the
branch and as soon as completely formed fall off. On the second to fourth day definite
spore-producing areas known as “stromata” are formed. Each consists of densely
well-woven felt of filaments with short branches, matted together until the filamentous
character of the fungus is almost lost. The stromata are visible to the naked eye as
tiny black dots by the third or fourth day. Their component filaments are soon
differentiated into two kinds at the surface of the stroma. The majority are short,
crowded and turned more or less at right angles to the surface with a dense layer.
Others, fewer in number, growing out into dark hairs sometimes scattered but more
usually forming a sort of fringe round the edge of the stroma.
The spores are more or less sickle shaped, undivided and measure from 20 to 30
thousands of a millimetre in length by 5 to 7 in breadth. They contain a large
refractive dot in the centre. The hairs are dark greenish-brown with several septa,
and are about four to six times as long as the spores.
At an early period, a second sort of spore is formed in the cultures. This is what is
known as a “chlamydospore” (“gemma” of Went). It is formed out of an ordinary
filament of the fungus, either at the tip or in its length. A portion of the filament is
Historical background 33
cut off by septum, turns dark in colour, and becomes thick-walled. The chlamydospores
are better adapted to stand unfavourable conditions of preservation than the ordinary
spores; though precise part they play in carrying on the disease is not known, yet
their presence in large numbers has probably of much significance. The quantities
that are found in some cases in the interior of the diseased canes may be the means
by which disease is disseminated when the latter are left to rot on the ground.
On germination, the spores (conidia) sometimes divide into two cells by a transverse
wall. They germinate by giving out one or a couple of filaments from near the ends.
These filaments may develop directly into a new plant, or may give rise at the tips
to secondary chlamydospores. After a period of rest, these secondary spores themselves
germinate. ”
The work of Kulkarni (1911) from Bombay needs special mention as most
of the authors have left the contribution of this gentleman to oblivion. He was the
third man in India to study the red rot. His findings supported those of Butler
(1906) that the disease is basically a sett-borne one and the pathogen gets entry
inside the cane through the root eyes and leaf scar region of the bud.
The other important point may also be highlighted from the publication of
Butler and Khan (1913) regarding the epidemiology of the red rot.
“At the Samalkota Sugar Station in Madras, sett selection has been regularly carried
out for the past ten years, at the instance of Dr. C. A. Barber, now Government
Sugarcane Expert, Madras. Dr. Barber was, we believe, the first to advocate this
method of fighting red rot. In the beginning, it was combined with pickling the setts
in a strong mixture of limewater and carbolic, with a view to checking moth borer
and the Queensland Acarus “rust”, but this was subsequently not considered necessary.
In 1906, Dr. Barber stated that it was not possible by mere rejection of red-marked
setts to root out the disease. In spite of all care, all but two of the local kinds were
found gradually to become worse, until they had to be replaced by new seed from
outside. Once these had been discarded, however, better results were obtained.
Thus, the 1907 report states that selection had a satisfactory effect, disease becoming
less every year among the best varieties.
In 1909-10, red rot was still present on the farm but to a far less extent than here
before. In 1910-11, very little disease was noted either on the farm or in the nursery,
though it was still prevalent outside the farm. It is fair to assume that the local
varieties, which were at first grown, were very largely from diseased stock. So long
as these varieties were retained, sett selection did not give satisfactory results.
When they were replaced by other, comparatively healthy varieties, sett selection
was effective in keeping the disease under control.
All that can safely be stated, so far, is that planting setts from obviously diseased
canes leads to a considerable development of disease in the resulting crop, and that
provided the variety is fairly free from disease to start with, sett selection keeps red
rot within reasonable limits, unless some untoward circumstance intervenes.
Historical background34
As was pointed out formerly this fungus is not, in Northern India, provided with as
suitable mechanism for spore distribution as in the case with most parasitic fungi.
As long as the cane is growing, there is comparatively little risk of air-borne
contamination from the stems of diseased plant in the crop. Dead and rotting canes
are, however, frequently well provided with spores. Enormous numbers are often
found in the pith cavities of old canes. These may contaminate the soil or get into the
irrigation water. They may thus reach the newly planted setts. Several experiments
have been carried out to ascertain whether infection of sound setts may take place in
this manner.
In all these cases, the presence of Colletotrichum was demonstrated in several of the
withering shoots, and they established fully that true red rot cane arises from infection
of the planted canes. Not only is the disease perpetuated by planting previously
diseased setts, but also healthy setts can be infected at the time of planting, if
reached by the fungus, and, no doubt, subsequent infection from below ground can
also occur. It is well known from previous work that the fungus can enter at wounds
exposing the pith, such as the cut ends of the setts, and as will be shown, infection
through the root readily occurs. The course of the infection up into the stem can be
traced in many cases and direct connection between the mycelium in the sett and
that in the new shoot was established.
At the cane node, there are two other points of discontinuity in the rind, where the
shoot bud (the “eye”) comes through and where the eyes of the adventitious roots
occur. These were found to admit the fungus readily.
Systematic and thorough selection of the setts used for planting must then be done
each year or the new varieties will not maintain their freedom from disease for long.
It is considered that there is no single operation in the cultivation of thick canes in
most parts of India of greater importance than this. It is not to be anticipated that the
disease can be got rid of by a single selection nor, indeed, usually got rid of entirely
by annual selection; the most that is claimed is that it can be kept within reasonable
limits in normal years and with good cultivation.
Of lesser importance, but still worth going in most cases, is the regular removal of
all withering clumps during the growing and ripening season. Such clumps, if left,
dry up and produce spores, sometimes in considerable quantity. Infection of even
perfectly sound cane through the aerial root eyes and through injured buds has been
shown to occur, and though experience in Northern India has been that such infection
is not common, it is perhaps more frequent in Madras, where the disease appears to
be more virulent and rapid in its onset than with us. There is, also, the danger of
infection through the soil, especially in irrigated cane, by means of the shed
spores ...”
“... When setts cut from diseased cane (and, therefore, usually allowing reddened
pith at the cut ends) are planted, they germinate in most cases as well as if sound
“seed” were used, unless the infection is severe and of long standing. However,
many of the young shoots begin to wither when they are a few weeks old, and the
presence of actively growing Colletotrichum can be demonstrated in them. Many
Historical background 35
shoots, however, for a time grow out from the fungus, which remains dormant in the
base of the cane. When the crop is about six months old and is beginning to contain
appreciable quantity of sugar, the parasite resumes activity, and from October on (in
northern India) withered shoots are found in increasing numbers. By the end of the
season many clumps, and even large fields, may be entirely destroyed. Periodic
examination enables the fungus to be traced in the young shoot and, later on, rising
from the under ground parts into large canes. Fields in which the “seed” is known to
have come from a diseased crop will show much red rot, while adjacent fields
planted with healthy “seed” (even of varieties known to suffer) may have little or
none. This occurs to a marked extent in land not recently under sugarcane, but is
also often seen where the crop has been repeated after three or four years. There is,
therefore, no room to suppose that infection from the soil, and not from the diseased
setts, can be responsible for the disease in these epidemic outbreaks. Not only has it
been found that naturally infected setts can carry over the disease, but perfectly
healthy, growing canes have been artificially inoculated with pure cultures of the
fungus obtained both from the leaves and the stem, and when subsequently cut up into
setts and planted, have given rise to shoots infected with red rot. …
It early becomes obvious to any observer of sugarcane diseases that there are immense
differences in the susceptibility of canes to attack. The thin canes, so commonly
grown in India, are on the whole, much less liable to red rot than the thick. Their
resistance seems to be inherent, whereas the temporary resistance of certain classes
of thick canes, which has been observed from time to time, appears to break down
readily under unfavourable conditions of the environment.”
Butler’s critical observations found support much later by the subsequent
workers in India, though his findings did not receive the needed appreciation at
that time from outside India, especially from USA. As it is known today, the
difference of cane growing climate drastically altered the host physiology, which
was reflected in the pests as well as the pathogen problems in both these countries.
Red rot is essentially a disease of standing cane in India, whereas in USA
C. falcatum accentuates the sett rotting caused by Pythium and other soil fungi.
The fungus C. falcatum does not like cold weather and the harsh cold climate of
USA restricts its growth severely.
The march of red rot in India36
5
THE MARCH OF RED ROT IN INDIA
Red rot is not an introduced disease in India. It was prevalent since
pre-historic times, as one finds its mention in Buddhist literature. The disease
systemically ravaged the S. officinarum canes and thus, hindered the proliferation
of ‘noble canes’ in their primary centre of origin (Daniels and Daniels, 1976).
Before the advent of present day hybrids in 1918, sugar mills were mostly growing
‘noble canes’ and were suffering heavily from the frequent crop damage due to
red rot. The indigenous thin canes (S. barberi), though less in sucrose and yield
tolerated the red rot menace well and were the predominant genotypes used by
the native ‘gur’ making cottage industry. The 1985 epidemic of red rot in Godavari
Delta, after its first report by Went (1893) from Java, remains the first major
catastrophe of the disease in India. Since then red rot assumed serious proportion
and damaged the sugarcane crop with impunity.
Red rot ran through many excellent varieties during its course. In fact, it
has practically left no sugarcane cultivars untouched. Eventually, all the varieties
fell prey to red rot and had to be withdrawn from the general cultivation, or had
to be replaced by the new more tolerant genotypes. The popular cane genotypes
that served the Indian sugar industry well, such as, Co 213, Co 281, Co 290, Co
312, Co 313, Co 419, Co 421, Co 453, Co 527, Co 658, Co 975, Co 997, Co 1148,
Co 7717, CoC 671, CoC 85061, CoC 86062, CoC 92061, CoJ 64, CoJ 82, CoJ 84,
CoLk 8001, CoLk 8102, CoS 245, CoS 510, CoS 770, CoS 767, CoS 802, CoS
8436, CoSe 93232, CoSe 92423, BO 3, BO 10, BO 11, BO 14, BO 17, BO 29, BO
34, BO 54, BO 120, BO 128, etc. succumbed to the onslaught of red rot and the
list of such casualties is an ever increasing one (Table 5.1). No sugarcane genotype
could stand erect against the threat of red rot. Probably this is the reason that
entire sugarcane breeding in India is geared around red rot resistance. Moreover,
The march of red rot in India 37
this perpetual threat has taken a heavy toll on sugar production. Greater
susceptibility of high sugar genotypes to red rot and wilt has deterred the cultivation
of such genotypes on a large scale, and has forced the cultivation of more tolerant
cane genotypes with moderate sugar, especially in subtropical belt of India.
Table 5.1. The march of red rot in India, since it hit the Godavari Delta
in 1895
Year Area Major genotype affected 
1895-1901 Godavari Delta  
(Andhra Pradesh) 
Namalu, Keli, Bourbon, Ashy Mauritius, 
Striped Mauritius 
1902-1913 Champaran,  
Muzaffarpur (Bihar) 
Bourbon, Striped Mauritius 
1922 Jammu (Kashmir)  
1925 Punjab  
1932 Pusa (Bihar) Co 210 
1936 Inthiathoke (Gonda, U.P.)  
1937 Gola, Nagina (U.P.)  
1938-40 Uttar Pradesh, Bihar Co 213 
1946-47, 
1951-68 
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar 
Co 312, Co 313,  Co 419, Co 421, Co 443, 
Co 453, Co 513, Co 997, CoS 510 , CoS 514, 
BO 3, BO 11, BO 17, Mamchuah (local variety) 
1960-70 Andhra Pradesh Co 421, Co 419,Co 997, Co 62175 
1971-75 Tamil Nadu Co 419, Co 658, Co 6304 
1978-83 Andhra Pradesh CoC 671, CoA 7701 
1981-85 Kerala Co 997, Co 419, Co 785 
1970-85 Uttar Pradesh, Haryana,  
Punjab, Bihar 
Co 1148, Co 7717, CoJ 64,  CoS 527, CoS 659, 
CoS 770, BO 29, BO 32, BO 54, BO 70 
1992-97 Gujarat, Tamil Nadu CoC 671, CoC 85061, CoC 86062,  
CoC 90063, CoC 92061 
1991-95 Uttar Pradesh CoS 767, CoS 802 
1990-99 Andhra Pradesh Co 7508, CoC 86062 
2000-2005
 Uttar Pradesh CoS 8436, CoSe 92232, CoSe 92423, BO 120, 
BO 128 
 
The march of red rot in India38
RED ROT IN HYBRID CANE- EPIDEMICS AND AFTERMATH
Red rot research in India on hybrid cane varieties
It is amply clear that a major share of our knowledge of red rot in India
stemmed from the researches of Butler. However, his research was confined to
the available thick canes (S. officinarum) and the popular local canes of S. barberi
type. After the departure of Butler from the Indian scene, the situation changed
altogether with respect to the genetic make-up of the host. Then came the hybrid
sugarcane (the fruits of breeding efforts at Coimbatore) – the Co 205 became the
first successful hybrid, yielding more than double of the popular canes like ‘Katha’
(S. barberi) in the Punjab and revolutionised the sugarcane and sugar industry of
India.  However, the euphoria of resistance to red rot did not last long and within
a span of a few years, these first generation hybrid canes were also attacked by
red rot. It is on record that Co 210 got severely affected at Pusa in 1932, and thus
started the misadventure of red rot again (in hybrid cane) in India.
Indigo vs Sugarcane
A historical event of first order was the discovery of synthetic indigo dye
in Germany in 1880s. By 1897, cheap commercial production started in a bigway.
In the back drop of World War I, synthetic indigo dye flooded the European
market leaving no room for natural indigo. The easy availability of cheap dye
forced a steep fall in price and as a result, neel (indigo) dye, an important
commodity of commerce in British India, could not stand up to the challenge.
Thus, neel farming became uneconomical and was abandoned. In 1931, Pandit
Madan Mohan Malviya successfully pleaded in the Assembly the plight of farmers
after stoppage of indigo cultivation in U.P. and Bihar; as an alternative to neel
(indigo), hybrid sugarcane was introduced in this neel growing area to save the
farmers. At that period, newly evolved hybrid canes showed great promise and
most of the new plantings were of hybrid canes.  Excellent performance of the
new hybrid Co 213 in northern India prompted its spread like a wild fire, and
within a very short span covered thousands of hectares in eastern Uttar Pradesh
and northern Bihar (predominantly neel growing area). In fact, first ‘Green
revolution’ was ushered in sugarcane in 1920’s when Co 205 (first hybrid cane
released from Coimbatore) yielded more than the double in red rot ravaged area
of the Punjab.  This, along with tariff protection by Govt. of India in 1932, boosted
sugarcane cultivation. In 150 years of sugar manufacturing in India, the industry
could muster only 29 mills in operation up to 1930-31. The industry grew in leaps
and bounds, and within a span of two years, the number rose to 111 in 1933-34!
The honeymoon period of sugar industry did not last long and red rot spoiled the
euphoria.
The march of red rot in India 39
The epidemic of 1938-39 and aftermath
This quick spread (to get high dividend from sugarcane cultivation by the
newly established sugar factories) subverted the normal precautions of good and
healthy seed. This simple folly took a very heavy toll. The red rot hit hard the
Indian Sugar Industry in 1938-39 flooring the excellent hybrid genotype Co 213 in
thousands of hectares in eastern Uttar Pradesh and northern Bihar (incidentally
its female parent, POJ 213 also suffered badly in USA during late 1920’s and
1930’s). This epidemic changed the entire face of red rot in India. It was observed
that contrary to the prevailing ideas, the epidemic was not confined to low lying
or ill drained fields only. Co 213 was affected everywhere from upland to lowlands
and from acidic to alkaline soils. From the prevalent dark, less sporulating
Colletotrichum falcatum (pre epidemic isolates mostly prevalent on noble canes)
arose a highly sporulating virulent light culture (isolate No. 78, IARI) attacking
the new hybrid canes. This culture was quite different from that of the earlier
reported ones. However, it may be pointed out that though Louisiana, USA was
also growing hybrid canes at that period and faced red rot problem in 1920s and
1930s, it did not meet with such virulent isolates. In fact, Dr. Abbott commented
“when I was in India in 1956, I was shown some cultures of Colletotrichum that
seemed very different in cultural characters from the fungus we have in Louisiana.”
During the visit to Louisiana in 1992, the author also noticed the difference – the
cultures obtained on isolations from the spindle infections (in June) were quite
similar to the cultures readily obtained on isolations from mid-rib in India —
dark, velvety with sparse sporulation.
The epidemic of 1938-39 is the turning point of Indian sugarcane and sugar
industry. This forced the administrators to think about entrusting the sugarcane
research to a specialized group, and in 1941, The Central Sugarcane Committee
was formed to look after this specific need. To further the advance of sugarcane
research, on the recommendations of Sir T.S. Ventakatraman, a Central Institute
exclusively for sugarcane was established in Lucknow in 1952 (now known as
the Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research) to look after all aspects of sugarcane
culture other than cane breeding. Dr. B. K. Mukherjee, a well-known agronomist
from Sugarcane Research Station, Shahjahanpur took the charge as Head of the
Institute and Mr. S. A. Rafay moved from Pusa to Lucknow to start research on
Sugarcane Pathology at the Institute.
Epidemics prior to 1938-39 were mostly restricted to thick canes - those
belonged to Saccharum officinarum. The thin canes typified by S. barberi usually
escaped red rot infection or the damage was not to such an extent that could draw
immediate attention (established an endemicity).  Though some amount of infection
was always there in the thin north Indian canes, it did not pose any serious problem
The march of red rot in India40
to the cultivation of sugarcane. Duttamajumder and Misra (unpublished
observation) have indicated that the thin barberi canes possess high degree of
nodal resistance/tolerance as indicated by the non-rotting of the nodes against
many C. falcatum isolates through nodal inoculation. However, when inoculated
using plug method, the internodal tissues were severely damaged showing S/HS
reactions. Moreover, most of these isolates failed to infect when inoculated using
nodal methods.
Table 5.2. Parentage of a few early sugarcane genotypes indicating the
involvement of limited source of disease resistance
Genotype 
 Parentage Year of release/ 
identification 
Station 
Co 205 Vellai x S. spontaneum 1918 SBI, Coimbatore 
POJ 213 Black Cheribon x Chunnee  POJ, Java 
POJ 2878 POJ 2364 x EK 28 1922 POJ, Java 
Co 213 POJ 213 x Co 291 1918 SBI, Coimbatore 
Co 244 POJ 213 x Co 205 1922 SBI, Coimbatore 
Co 285 Green Sport x S. spontaneum 1924 SBI, Coimbatore 
Co 312 Co 213 x Co 244 1928 SBI, Coimbatore 
Co 313 Co 213 x Co 244 1928 SBI, Coimbatore 
Co 419 POJ 2878 x Co 290 1933 SBI, Coimbatore 
Co 421 POJ 2878 x Co 285 1934 SBI, Coimbatore 
Co 449 POJ 2878 x Co 331 1938 SBI, Coimbatore 
Co 453 Black Cheribon x Co 285 1938 SBI, Coimbatore 
Co 740 P 3247 x P 4775 1949 SBI, Coimbatore 
Co 975 Co 527 x Co 617 1953 SBI, Coimbatore 
Co 997 Co 683 x P1 63/62 (POJ 2725) 1953 SBI, Coimbatore 
Co 1148 P 4383 x Co 301 1963 SBI, Coimbatore 
Co 1158 Co 421 x Co 419 1963 SBI, Coimbatore 
Co 7717 Co 419 x Co 775 1978 SBI, Coimbatore 
CoC 671 Q 63 x Co 775 1975 Cuddalore 
CoJ 64 Co 976 x Co 617 1971 Jalandhar 
CoL 9      Co 312 x Co 285 1945 Lyallpur 
CoL 29 Co 312 x Co 285 1954 Jalandhar 
CoS 510 Co 453 x Co 557 1954 Shahjahanpur 
CoS 527 Co 349 x Co 312 1946 Shahjahanpur 
CoS 687 Co 976 x Co 312 1980 Shahjahanpur 
CoS 767 Co 419 x Co 313 1979 Shahjahanpur 
BO 3 Co 312 x Co 326 1948 Pusa 
BO 11 Co 331 x POJ 2878 1948 Pusa 
BO 17 Co 331 x Co336 1955 Pusa 
BO 54 BO 17 x BO 3 1969 Pusa 
 
The march of red rot in India 41
These new cane genotypes being the first generation interspecific hybrids,
had a good share of S. spontaneum component (due to 2n +n transmission). The
pathogen gradually spread its tentacles to other genotypes like Co 290 (it replaced
Co 205), Co 370, Co 393, Co 421, Co 357, CoS 5, etc. Obviously, these genotypes
succumbed to the existing race flora of north India that was thriving on S. barberi
and S. officinarum types. The traditional ‘gur’ making cottage industry used mostly
the cultivars of S. barberi. The noble cane best served the religious and chewing
purpose. The luxuriant growth, excellent juice quality and high yield potential of
noble canes attracted the attention of both sugar industry and the farmers. To
increase the cane supply quickly and to reap a good sugar harvest, a rampant
introduction of these canes took place and in most cases, the basic philosophy of
seed health was relegated to the side line. This neglect helped the spread of
C. falcatum along with the planting material “seed cane” from one place to
another. As a consequence both millers and farmers had to pay a heavy price to
bear with and in many cases it put the sugar mills to total bankruptcy. The same
‘boom and bust cycle’, which was indicated earlier by Watt (1893) is still
continuing, and a good number of excellent genotypes are regularly being phased
out of cultivation due to the breach of resistance by red rot. With the release of a
new variety of sugarcane, its acreage gradually increases and it becomes the
variety of choice; then red rot breaks out to mock at the claims of resistance
made at the time of its release, forcing a denotification and withdrawal of the
variety from cultivation.
In fact, most of the cane genotypes, so far withdrawn/denotified from
commercial cultivation in India were due to the arrival of new races/pathotypes
of red rot pathogen in the scene, making the survival of the variety difficult in the
field. To counter the 1938-39 red rot epidemic, the work of seed replacement
was started on a war footing. Strong emphasis was given on reaching out to the
farmers and probably this was the first epidemic of any plant disease in India
where street plays were organised to educate the farmers for managing the malady.
Songs were composed and direct interactions with farmers through street plays
were organised. Pamphlets and other literature were distributed freely. The red
rot epidemic of 1938-39 affected the genotype Co 213 and it was replaced with
Co 313 in north Bihar, Co 513 in South Bihar and Co 312 in Uttar Pradesh.
Co 313, the variety that replaced Co 213, fell prey to this pathogen in 1946-47.
The other cane genotypes that also felt the heat of red rot were Co 301, Co 312
and Co 385. Incidentally, the female parent of Co 312 and Co 313 was Co 213
(which was affected in 1938-39) and there was no fresh involvement of any
spontaneum clone directly for the red rot resistance (Table 5.2). The spontaneum
component for red rot resistance came from Co 244, which in turn received it
from Co 205. In Bihar, Co 453 largely replaced the affected Co 313. The fall of
The march of red rot in India42
Co 453 gave rise to the appearance of “D” strain (isolate No. 244). The fall of
BO 11 yielded the “I” strain. In Bihar, the Coimbatore-bred varieties were
replaced with the Pusa-bred genotypes like BO 3, BO 10, BO 11, BO 14 and
BO 17 (Cane breeding at Pusa is possible as sugarcane flowering and seed setting
also takes place over there, though in much lesser number, in comparison to
what is obtained at Coimbatore).
The 1938-39 epidemic prompted many researchers to look into the red rot
problem. At Pusa, the place where Butler did the monumental work, Mr. K.L.
Khanna and later on Mr. S. A. Rafay took up work on red rot fungus again.
However, most of the researches of Mr. Khanna are only in the pages of Annual
Report of Central Sugarcane Research Station, Pusa (from 1940 onwards). His
findings are mostly the extension of Butler’s findings (Butler, 1906; Butler and
Khan, 1913). It was apparent that the new hybrid canes with different resistance
genes (from S. spontaneum) also behaved in the same fashion as the noble canes
(S. officinarum). The only difference that was evident was the intensity of the
disease, which was more in the hybrid canes. The explanation of this situation
came much later with other host-pathogen combinations. With the gain of matching
gene(s) for virulence in the quiver to counter the genes governing host resistance,
pathogen attacks in vengeance and produces susceptibility to the highest degree,
which is not even encountered in the universal susceptible type. Later on,
Vaderplank (1968) tried to explain this situation as the erosion of horizontal
resistance due to breeding for vertical resistance and termed it as the ‘vertifolia’
effect. However, the interplay of genes in sugarcane is still shrouded in mystery.
Due to the complexity of sugarcane genome, the extension of various theories in
this pathosystem is more of conjecture in nature than the actual experimental
provings.
The epidemic of 1946-47 and breeding for disease resistance
After the red rot epidemic of 1946-47 in Uttar Pradesh that affected popular
varieties Co 312 and Co 313, research efforts were geared up to test the sugarcane
genotypes against red rot pathogen before their actual release for cultivation. A
strong group of workers under the able leadership of Dr. B. L. Chona started
working on this disease at the Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi.
Chona (1954) gave a detailed account of his work on screening of the sugarcane
genotypes. The Table 5.3 (adapted from Chona, 1954) is highlighted here to drive
home the point of variability of C. falcatum, which changed from season to season,
and relatively limited field life of a variety. Due to the narrow genetic base
(genes governing red rot resistance apparently came from the same parents used
a few generations back for the development of interspecific hybrids), sooner or
later, care genotypes succumbed to the onslaught of the pathogen (Table 5.1 &
5.2). Chona (1954) recorded that :
The march of red rot in India 43
“The proper selection of the C. falcatum isolate to be used in these varietal resistance
tests is obviously of utmost importance. The possibility of existence of C. falcatum
strains of varying virulence was kept in mind from the very beginning of the red rot
resistance tests. C. falcatum isolates from different cane varieties and localities
were always studied for their virulence and only the most virulent one, available in
our collection, was always used for the varietal resistance tests. Prior to 1938-39 red
rot epidemic in eastern U.P. and northern Bihar tract, only dark types of C. falcatum
isolates were met with in the various isolations that were not highly virulent. During
the epidemic, two morphologic races, one light coloured with profuse sporulation
and the other dark coloured and sparsely sporing, similar to the old pre-epidemic
type, were met with (Chona and Padwick, 1942). The light type was found to be
highly virulent and was selected and used in the red rot varietal resistance tests for
about six seasons (1941-47); when its virulence was found to be falling off, and it was
replaced in further tests of the last two seasons (1947-49) with a fresh virulent
isolate obtained from 1946-47 red rot epidemic areas of U.P. The existence of
physiologic forms of the red rot fungus C. falcatum Went, certainly complicates the
work of varietal resistance tests. A large number of C. falcatum isolates obtained
from different varieties and localities have been tested. The differences in the various
isolates are mainly of their virulence. Generally speaking, the light type isolates are
more virulent than the dark type. …
One more point, however, has to be kept in mind, i.e., the maintenance of the
selected isolate in a pure form, as some of the isolates have been found to mutate in
culture. The fungus after a few subculturings may be quite different from the parent
culture, both morphologically as well as in pathogenicity.”
The loss of virulence (stability) in culture has always posed a serious problem
in the identification of isolates in physiologic groups based on pathogenicity. This
riddle has to be solved to prolong the life of a cane genotype in commercial run.
If pathogen is so quick to shed off the genes governing pathogenicity in artificial
culture, it is difficult to contemplate the mechanism(s) pathogen employs to
maintain these genes in natural population. Moreover, how these pathogenicity
genes are gained and how quickly they are transferred in the population, remain
the moot questions. C. falcatum is a transient visitor of the soil and hardly has
any existence outside the sugarcane debris. It is not comfortable to venture out of
the boundaries of debris in the presence of strong antagonistic flora in the soil
environment. It appears that this may be one of the reasons that moderated
C. falcatum to evolve to a near obligate type of relationship with the host sugarcane.
The semi-perennial nature of the crop has helped in the evolution of the pathogen
in this direction. In this situation, obviously to increase its survival value, pathogen
has to have enormous array of variability or method of accumulation of variability
from natural population to have an effective parasitic life (i.e., to reproduce in
sufficient number). The enormous variation in the virulence of C. falcatum is the
perpetual problem in the development of resistant sugarcane clones and in their
cultivation for a reasonable period of time (field life).
The march of red rot in India44
Table 5.3 Summary of the statement showing resistance and susceptibility
to red rot of the various cane varieties tested at I.A.R.I., during
1936-49
Resistant Moderately resistant Susceptible 
Cane variety Reaction 
(different 
season) 
No. of 
years 
tested 
Cane variety Reaction 
(different 
season) 
No. of 
years 
tested 
Cane variety Reaction 
(different 
season) 
No. of 
years 
tested 
Co 349* 3R 3 Co 205 4M-1R 5 Co 213 2R-3M-8S 13 
Co 356 9R-4M 13 Co 214 5M-6R-1S 12 Co 221 2S 2 
Co 441 6R-2M 8 Co 229 3M 3 Co 223 1R-2M-10S
 13 
Co 532 5R 5 Co 243 2M 2 Co 291 3S 3 
Co 547 6R 6 Co 244* 6M-6R 12 Co 299 11S 11 
Co 548 5R 5 Co 281* 8M-3R 11 Co 312* 3R-8M-2S 13 
Co 549 5R 5 Co 285* 5M-8R 13 Co 313* 6R-5M-2S 13 
BO 4 5R 5 Co 290* 11M-2R 13 Co 331 7M-6S 13 
CoK 34 3R 3 Co 300 3M 3 Co 361 1S 1 
Chunnee 4R-2M 6 Co 301* 1M-2R 3 Co 362 1M-8S 9 
S.spontaneum 
(Coimbatore) 
2R 2 Co 352 4M-6R 10 Co 373 2R-4S 6 
S.spontaneum 
(Burma) 
2R 2 Co 360 9M-1R 10 Co 417 2M-8S 10 
S.spontaneum 
(Glagah, Java) 
3R 3 Co 370* 6M-3R 9 Co 426 3M-7S 10 
   Co 371 4M-3R 7 Co 445 1M-6S 7 
   Co 385* 8M-2R 10 Co 457 1M-6S 7 
   Co 386 4M-2R 6 Co 458 4S 4 
   Co 393* 2M-5R 7 Co 467* 1M-2S 3 
   Co 395* 4M-2R 6 Co 469 2S 2 
   Co 396* 4M-3R 7 Co 471 1S 1 
   Co 402 6M-3R 9 Co 472 2S 2 
   Co 408 1M-2R 3 Co 473 2S 2 
   Co 411 5M-6R 11 Co 474 1M-1S 2 
   Co 412 10M-2R 12 Co 526 7S 7 
   Co 413* 6M-5R 11 Co 528 3M-4S 7 
   Co 419* 6M-6R 12 Co 540 1S 1 
   Co 421* 8M-5R 13 Co 552 2M-1S 3 
   Co 432 7M-3R 10 Co 556 3S 3 
   Co 433 4M-2R 6 Co 557 1M-2S 3 
   Co 434 3M-4R 7 Co 642 2S 2 
   Co 439 4M-2R 6 B.H.V 2S 2 
   Co 442 3M 3 CAC 87 1M-2S 3 
   Co 443 8M-2R 10 CoK 25 3R-1M-2S 6 
   Co 444 3M-3R 6 CoK 26 1R-3M-2S 6 
   Co 449* 4M 4 CoK 29 4S 4 
   Co 453* 2M-2R 4 CoK 31 2M-2S 4 
   Co 459 2M-3R 5 CoK 35 3S 3 
   Co 460 4M 4 CoK 38 1M-2S 3 
   Co 461 3M-1R 4 HM 661 1M-1S 2 
   Co 462 2M-2R 4 K 1216 1S 1 
   Co 463 3M-1R 4 P 1587 1M-2S 3 
   Co 464 6M-2R 8 SG 63/32 2S 2 
   Co 466 3M 3 POJ 213 2S 2 
   Co 468 3M 3 POJ 1499 3S 3 
 
The march of red rot in India 45
R= Resistant, M= Moderately resistant, S= Susceptible,  *= Important commercial cane varieties
(Adapted from Table IV of Chona, 1954)
Resistant Moderately resistant Susceptible 
Cane variety Reaction 
(different 
season) 
No. of 
years 
tested 
Cane variety Reaction 
(different 
season) 
No. of 
years 
tested 
Cane variety Reaction 
(different 
season) 
No. of 
years 
tested 
    Co 475* 3M-1R 4 POJ 2725 2S 2 
   Co 508* 5M-5R 10 Striped 
Mauritius 
1S 1 
   Co 513* 4M-5R 9 Uba Marrot 3S 3 
   Co 523 3M 3 Surkha 
saharanpuri 
1S 1 
   Co 524 6M-3R 9 Dehra Dun 
Paunda 
3S 3 
   Co 527* 4M 4 Peshwar 
Paunda 
1S 1 
   Co 529 3M-4R 7    
   Co 531 4M-2R 6    
   Co 538 4M 4    
   Co 534 2M-1R 3    
   Co 545 3M-1R 4    
   Co 546 5M-4R 9    
   Co 550 1M-2R 3    
   Co 551 3M-1R 4    
   Co 553 2M-2R 4    
   Co 554 3M-1R 4    
   Co 555 2M-1R 3    
   Co 558 1M-2R 3    
   Co 605 3M 3    
   Co 617 3M 3    
   Co 627 1M-2R 3    
   CoK 10 3M-2R 5    
   CoK 22 4M-2R 6    
   CoK 27 3M 3    
   CoK 28 1M-2R 3    
   CoK 30* 2M-2R 4    
   CoK 36 3M 3    
   CoK 37 3M 3    
   CoK 39 2M-1R 3    
   CoS 5 3M-2R 5    
   CoS 76* 2M-4R 6    
   G 1051 2M-1R 3    
   SC 851 2M-1R 3    
   POJ 1410 3M 3    
   POJ 2961 3M 3    
   Hemja 3M-2R 5    
   Pansahi 2M-3R 5    
   Saretha 5M-1R 6    
   Uba 3M-1R 4    
 
The Fungus46
6
THE FUNGUS
Description of Colletotrichum falcatum Went
(= Glomerella tucumanensis von Arx and Muller)
The fungus causing red rot of sugarcane is commonly known by its imperfect
state, i.e., Colletotrichum falcatum Went. The disease was first described to the
scientific world in 1893 by Went (Went, 1893) from Java (now Indonesia).
Incidentally, the perfect state (Physalospora tucumanensis Speg.) was first
recorded by Spegazzini from Argentina in 1896 (Spegazzini, 1896) but it took
almost half a century to establish the association between Colletotrichum falcatum
Went and Physalospora tucumanensis Speg. (Carvajal and Edgerton, 1944). Ten
years later von Arx and Muller from Germany transferred this fungus
Physalospora tucumanensis to the genus Glomerella and renamed it as Glomerella
tucumanensis (Speg.) von Arx and Muller (von Arx and Muller, 1954). The
identifying characteristics of the imperfect state, the disease-causing phase, as
described by different authors (Abbott, 1938; Sivanesan and Waller, 1986; Abbott
and Hughes, 1961; Sutton 1980) are given below :
Colony greyish white with sparse aerial mycelium, occasional small dense
felty patches, reverse white to grey, conidial masses (Plate 18a, b) salmon pink
(light race); some cultures have abundant greyish white aerial mycelium with
poor sporulation and no distinct acervuli (dark race). Sclerotia not produced by
both the races, setae sparse, conidia falcate (but not markedly so), fusoid, apices
obtuse, 15.5 (25-26.5) 48 m x 4 (5-6) 8 m (Plates 19, 20, 21, 22) and contents
are granular and sometime contain oil globules. The central white area, when
stained with appropriate stains indicates the presence of nuclear material. A
conidium usually contains single central nucleus (Plate 20). The occurrence of
more than one nucleus in the conidium is often observed (Plate 21). With the
The Fungus 47
addition of nitrogenous substances like peptone in the medium the conidial shape
and size changes quite significantly. Conidia appear more falcate, (Plate 19e)
the average length goes up and ranges in 35-40 m and the breadth comes down
to 4-5 m. Occasionally the presence of aberrant conidia measuring more than
60 m (Plate 25g) was also noticed in peptone containing media (Duttamajumder,
unpublished observation). Conidia do not have any resting period and can germinate
immediately after their production. Most of the conidia follow a normal pattern
of germination. Usually it registers sub-polar germination (Plates 22, 23) from
one or both ends of the conidium. Sometimes another germ tube comes out from
the central portion of the conidium. Usually the conidium develops a median
septum before germination but germination without septa is also common.
Development of septa without germination was also noticed occasionally
(Plate 19). In rare cases, germination of conidia directly leads to development of
conidiophore yielding daughter conidium (Plate 25) (Duttamajumder,
unpublished). After germination, the hypha may immediately produce appressoria
(1, 2, 3, the number may vary) or may continue to grow depending on the available
environment (Plate 23). From the appressorium infection peg develops which
enters the host tissue and initiates infection process (Plates 23, 24). During the
germination of conidium the central nucleus divides in two and each migrates to
the respective distal end and thereafter a central septation develops dividing the
conidia into two halves. Thereafter, the nucleus undergoes one more division
and then one daughter nucleus travels to the hypha.
Under stress, like exposure to toxic chemicals like fungicides (sub-lethal
dose) or under waterlogged situation or even in old culture (spore mass in
acervulus), conidia germinate and produce a fusion aggregate (Plates 33, 34) to
consolidate the available variability to overcome the stress situation
(Duttamajumder et al., 1990). From the fusion aggregates, a new crop of conidia
develops (Plates 33, 35). In the stress situation like waterlogging, walls of the
thin hyaline conidia get thickened and become dark coloured (Plate 33b). Contrary
to the common description, occasional dark coloured conidia are often observed
in old cultures.
Appressoria medium brown, clavate or circular, edge entire, 12.5-14.5
m x 9.5-12 m (6-21 x 6-17 m). The appressorium bears a pore/light area
from where the infection peg comes out (Plates 23, 24). These structures
(appressoria) have little or no resting period and immediately germinate to develop
infection peg. The other type, produced mostly in/on the cane tissue/apical leaf
folds (Plates 6, 24) (especially during spindle infection) and also observed in the
backside of agar media in petridish culture (Plate 24a), often stays for a longer
time without germination and acts as chlamydospore. These spores usually show
The Fungus48
definite content within it when stained with appropriate dye (Plate 24c). The
appressoria are quite typical in the genus Colletotrichum. In fact, Sutton (1966)
took the smoothness, area and type of development of appressoria as an important
character in the differentiation of species in the genus Colletotrichum.
Chlamydospores may remain viable for sometime and may serve as perpetuating
structures. They appear to be more important as appressoria and germinate to
form an infection peg capable of penetrating the  cane plant (Butler, 1906; Edgerton
and Carvajal, 1944). However, the reason for their preponderance in spindle
infection is not yet clear.
The asexual fruiting structure of Colletotrichum is acervulus (Plates 13,
16, 26), which develops due to the aggregation of short and compressed
conidiophores producing large mass of conidia embedded in a gelatinous matrix.
In the acervulus, dark brown setae measuring 100-200 m also develop. The
setae are septate stout structures, sometimes with bulbous base, tapering toward
the tip (Plate 26). Development of synnematous setae (Plate 28) has also been
observed with many isolates. Occasional development of colourless setae has
also been noticed in some isolated cases. The setae are usually sterile structure
and do not contribute to the multiplication of the pathogen. However, it has been
noticed that under favourable condition, when tip remains hyaline, it can contribute
in the production of conidia (Plate 27) (Edgerton, 1959, Duttamajumder, 2002).
This type of situation is encountered in the leaf folds of spindle infection and in
case, when sporulation takes place within the cavities formed in the internodal
tissues of the cane. Sometimes the hyaline tip grows to produce a hyphal mass
leading to the production of an acervulus. The exact role, these often-sterile
structures play in nature is not clearly understood. In the view of the author, the
setae serve twin purposes. On one hand these hide and hinder mites from devouring
up all the conidia and conidiophores from an acervulus and on the other hand
these act as vibrating structures (like tuning fork) which vibrates in air current
and aids in the dissemination of conidia (through spattering effect) embedded in a
gelatinous matrix.
Glomerella tucumanensis is an ascomycetous fungus and produces
ascospores in a typical 8-spored ascus in perithecium. Perithecia are inconspicuous
and are almost entirely embedded in the cane tissues (Plate 29). They are found
in abundance on dead or dying leaf lamina, mid-rib (under side), and leaf sheaths.
In the leaf tissue, they are crowded between the vascular strands, and measure
100-260 m in width by 80-250 m in height. Asci are clavate, measuring 70-90
m x 7.5 (13)-18 m.  Hyaline, straight to slightly fusoid, one-celled ascospores
measuring 18-22 m x 7-8 m are arranged in a biseriate pattern (Plates 29, 30)
in the ascus (Carvajal and Edgerton, 1944; Chona an d Bajaj, 1953;
The Fungus 49
Duttamajumder, 2002). Ascospores follow the same germination pattern (Plate
31) as the conidia (Duttamajumder, unpublished).
von Arx (1957) included most of the described species of C. falcatum on
Gramineae as synonyms of Colletotrichum graminicola (Ces.) Wils. and accepted
Glomerella tucumanensis (Speg.) von Arx and Muller (syn. Physalospora
tucumanensis Speg.) as the name of the perfect state of this species. However,
due to the strong and specific pathogenic reaction of C. falcatum to sugarcane, it
is considered different from C. graminicola (Sutton, 1980; Abbott and Hughes,
1961, Singh and Singh, 1989) and C. falcatum has been retained as a separate
species.
Physiology and growth
Abbott (1938) summarized the work carried out on different culture media
for growing C. falcatum. The fungus grows well on a variety of media including
PDA, OMA, Cornmeal, Carrot, Czapex-Dox, Bean-dextose. Oatmeal agar was
found most suitable for the growth and sporulation of C. falcatum. However,
OMA is opaque and thus hinders many observations, which normally are taken
from a clear growth medium. Abbott found that a medium consisting of decoction
of 100g sugarcane leaves, 5g NaNO3, 1g KH2PO4, 1g MgSO4 and 10g sucrose is
the most suitable alternative to OMA. Duttamajumder (unpublished) has found
that a medium containing 10g soluble starch, 5g peptone, 1g K2HPO4 and 0.5g
MgSO4 is suitable for induction of sporulation in sporulation-shy isolates.
Regarding the pH of the media, the fungus grows well in acidic media and a pH
of 5.0 to 6.0 was found most suitable. It is also important to note that the pH of
the cane juice is around 5.5 and C. falcatum has adapted to this natural environment
of the host tissue.
Abbott (1938) has also shown that a temperature between 27.5 to 32.5 0C
is optimum for the growth of C. falcatum isolates (Table 6.1). In a temperature
below 100C, hardly any growth takes place even after 30 days of incubation.
However, it is possible to gradually train C. falcatum to grow at a lower a
temperature (Duttamajumder unpublished). Similarly, at temperature above 400C,
no growth took place. However, subtropical isolates of C. falcatum that withstand
much higher temperature in the field during summer continue to grow at 400C.
There is an apprehension that exposure to high temperature (>400C) increases
virulence in C.falcatum.
The average mean radial growth of eight light type isolates was 6.1 cm,
whereas it was 6.0 cm for the nine dark type isolates at the end of 6 days of
incubation at 300C (Abbott, 1938). The average growth rate of C. falcatum is
about 10mm/day on OMA, whereas in the susceptible genotype a growth rate of
The Fungus50
In India, Ramakrishnan (1941) studied the physiological aspects of growth
and behaviour of C. falcatum. He found that C. falcatum grows well in a number
of standard media, including French bean and Richard’s agar and found oatmeal
agar to be the best. A pH of 4.5- 5.0 was found optimal by him for the growth.
Spores formed both at 150C and 300C were of normal size (19.9 -27.6 m).
Thermal death point of the conidia was five minutes at 510C. As regards the
source of carbon and nitrogen, sucrose was found to be the best for the former
while the latter was most easily assimilated from asparagin, potassium nitrate
or peptone and the optimum carbon: nitrogen ratio was 5:1. The shape and the
size of spores were found determined to some extent by the nitrogen source.
Table 6.1 Growth of two isolates of Colletotrichum falcatum at various
temperatures on oatmeal agar
G= germination only, F= filled entire plate
(Adapted from Abbott, 1938)
Diameter of colonies (cm) reached in days 
Isolate L-7 Isolate F-1 
Temperature (0C) 
3rd 4 th 6 th 8 th 3 rd 4 th 6 th 8 th 
  0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
  5.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
10.0 0.0 0.0 G G 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 
15.0 G G 1.9 3.3 G G 2.3 3.6 
17.5 0.7 1.9 3.8 5.1 0.9 2.2 4.3 5.5 
20.0 1.5 2.6 3.9 5.1 1.9 3.0 4.9 6.4 
22.5 2.2 4.0 4.7 8.2 2.4 3.9 5.8 8.3 
25.0 3.4 5.2 6.8 F 3.2 5.3 8.2 - 
27.5 2.6 6.0 8.8 - 3.4 5.9 8.9 - 
30.0 3.0 6.0 - - 4.1 6.2 - - 
32.5 3.3 4.7 7.3 - 4.0 5.8 8.5 - 
35.0 1.8 2.5 3.6 4.9 1.7 2.8 3.4 4.6 
37.5 0.5 1.5 2.5 3.0 G 0.6 0.9 1.5 
 
35mm/day of C. falcatum (vertical spread in the cane) is fairly common in
inoculation with plug method. Why the pathogen attains 350% higher growth rate
in the cane in comparison to OMA or sterilized cane is not clear. As far as sugar
depletion in the cane due to the invasion of C. falcatum is concerned, it hardly
drops beyond 4-6 units (%brix value), majority of sucrose remains unutilised at
the beginning of the appearance of full blown symptoms.
The Fungus 51
PERFECT STAGE - ITS OCCURRENCE AND ROLE
Occurrence of perfect stage in India
In 1952, Chona and Bajaj (1953) observed the perfect state of sugarcane in
India, for the first time, in an 18 months-old sugarcane crop at New Delhi and
published it in 1953. They reported :
“On a routine examination of an 18 months old sugarcane crop at New Delhi, some
dried up old leaves of various cane varieties still attached to the plant, showed
numerous, small black dots on the lamina, and to a lesser extent on leaf sheaths,
resembling pycnidia or perithecia.”
(The paper was accepted on October 4, 1953. ‘Thanks’ for the assistance
were accorded to Mr. R. L. Munjal, Asstt. Mycologist). Whereas, Chona and
Srivastava (1952) observed the occurrence of the perfect stage of C. falcatum in
culture at a later date (the paper was accepted for publication on October 12,
1953! with no such thanks, indicating that identity of the perfect stage had already
been established). It is not justified to report that Chona and Srivastava (1952)
were the first to observe the perfect stage of C. falcatum in India as one finds in
the writings of many authors. (Pers. comm. with Dr. R.L. Munjal).
Chona and Srivastava (1952) reported production of perithecia on dry old
sugarcane leaves inoculated with the conidia and incubated under high humid
conditions. Perithecia rarely developed on green autoclaved leaves and failed to
develop on medium devoid of intact plant parts. Enrichment with carbon and
nitrogen failed to elicit positive response for perithecial development (Chona et
al., 1960). Chona and his associates worked on various aspects of the perfect
stage of the fungus (Dutta et al., 1964 & 1965) but could not make much headway
in elucidating the role of the ascosporic inoculum in the epidemiology of the red
rot disease. Moreover, the contemporary workers in India were not able to detect
the perfect stage in the field and became sceptical about its very presence in
India, at least in sufficient numbers to become instrumental in generation of
variability in the fungus.  Duttamajumder (1996, IISR Annual Report) was able
to show the presence of perfect stage of red rot pathogen in India in sufficient
numbers throughout the length and breadth of the country. The abundant perithecia
formation was observed in any area wherever a conscious search had been made.
Perithecia appear on the dying/dead leaves during the monsoon and post monsoon
period (August, September in Uttar Pradesh). Perithecia formation is also
observed even in March when ambient environment is quite akin to that of August-
September (Duttamajumder, unpublished). However, during this period perithecia
are mostly restricted to the lower side of the dying mid-rib. In nature, nothing
The Fungus52
occurs in isolation. A succession of fungi occurs on the sugarcane leaf making
the appearance of the perithecia obscure to the casual observer.
On the basis of observations on the behaviour of the mid-rib populations as
well as the population that produces perithecia, the author has arrived at the
conclusion that the red rot fungus, C. falcatum is basically a leaf parasite, and
quite similar to Colletotrichum graminicola  that occurs on sorghum
(Duttamajumder, 2002). The pathogen completes its life cycle on the leaf of the
sugarcane, and it does so, irrespective of the resistance and susceptibility of
genotypes to stalk isolates. He further drew analogy from the human society,
where most of the people are peace loving but only a handful, ranging from petty
thieves, dacoits to the dreaded criminals create all sorts of nuisance in the society.
Similarly, the population of C. falcatum in sugarcane agro-ecosystem is also
peace loving and does not cause any significant harm to the cane crop as long as
it restricts itself to the mid-rib. Essentially, most of the C. falcatum population
thrives on the mid-rib without causing much harm to the yield potential of the
cane. In fact, these isolates do not infect cane and develop resistant reaction on
stalk inoculation. Occasionally an odd member acquires the audacity to invade
the stalk and unleash an avalanche of terror. No doubt, erection of jails and
enforcement of strict laws have contained the crime in human society but it
remained short lived. With all the deterrents in place, criminals are still
proliferating and causing nuisance. Long-term solution has always remained
elusive to the society. In the same analogy, breeding of disease resistant sugarcane
varieties provides a short-term solution to check the red rot menace. Time and
again, new pathotypes/races of C. falcatum have arrived in the scene just to turn
the apple cart down. A holistic system of sugarcane growing has to be developed
that discourages the formation and proliferation of the aberrant type C. falcatum
isolates. Like the spiritual upliftment of human society, it is well known that a
beginning has to be made from the very young age to change the bent of mind of
people. Proper management of the sugarcane crop from the very beginning (green
manuring, land preparation, appropriate fertilizer application, sett treatment
(MHAT, fungicide), roguing as well as use beneficial microorganisms like
Trichoderma, etc.) is necessary to sustain the crop health. A healthy seed
programme in a healthy field along with clean cultivation practices will go a long
way to reduce the chance of C. falcatum attack and will improve the prospects of
a better harvest.
Variability and race identification 53
7
VARIABILITY AND RACE IDENTIFICATION
Variability is the rule of nature
Variability is the rule of nature; it is the seminal mechanism available to
an organism to  maintain the diversity. Buxton (1959) wrote :
“For evidence of variability in plant pathogenic fungi there is no need to look further
than the many examples of crop varieties that have been bred for resistance to a
given disease only to succumb to that disease after they have been brought into
general cultivation.”
The red rot pathogen is no exception to this general situation; rather it is
more potent in changing the virulence pattern depending on the particular need to
match the introduced host resistance. Both sexual and asexual mechanisms are
operative for this purpose. However, one moot point that needs to be pondered at
is the generation of variability in C. falcatum. What is the basis of frequent
appearance of new virulences (races) that are able to start new outbreaks of
disease both in new localities and in previously resistant host varieties?
Mechanism of variation
The variations in the asexual state of the fungus (Colletotrichum state)
may originate through (a) heterokaryosis, (b) by recombination through parasexual
mechanism, and (c) by the universal mechanism of mutation, selection and
adaptation in response to the changes in the host environment.  Heterokaryosis is
the mechanism through which the fungus collects and consolidates two or more
genetically different nuclei in the hypha and derives the benefit of the introduced
genetic material. These newly gathered nuclei also multiply in tandem with the
native nuclei. Anastomosis of hyphal cell is common (Plate 32) in Colletorichum
falcatum (Duttamajumder et al., 1990; Singh and Payak, 1968; Carvalho, 1968).
Anastomoses may take place between hypha, hypha and conidium, conidium and
Variability and race identification54
conidium, conidium and appressorium (Plates 33, 34, 35). The frequency of
anastomosis increases with stress (physical as well as chemical) and the
involvement of more than 500 conidia to form fusion aggregate has been noticed
by the author (Plate 34 d). The migration of nuclei takes place through the hyphal
bridge formed due to anastomosis (Plate 34). Through some undefined
mechanism(s), fungus maintains a balance of native nuclei, and the nucleus gained
through anastomosis and derives most of the advantages as necessitated by the
changing environment of host or otherwise. Carvalho (1968) has shown the
luxuriant growth of C. falcatum in the mixture of two nutrient deficient mutants
(deficient in biotin and thiamine) in contrast to almost no growth of the parent
mutants and explained that this change is due to the heterokaryotic condition
resulting from anastomosis of hyphae and hetrokaryotic nuclei complementing/
supplementing each other to increase the fitness for survival. This may provide a
reasonable explanation to saltation, which cannot be explained satisfactorily
through the mechanism of mutation, as the rate of mutation is much lower to fit
the situation in the artificial culture. Thus, heterokaryosis assumes a great
significance in the development of races of C. falcatum whose population in nature
constitutes a mixture of numerous variable biotypes occurring on the leaf causing
innocuous laminar and mid-rib infections along with population capable of attacking
the stalk.
Mutation vs adaptation
The ubiquitous occurrence of mutations and their subsequent selection to
suit the available environment, gives an impression of a situation that most of the
workers have accepted the change as adaptation. However, such an adaptation is
mostly restricted to higher organisms where specific gene(s) is expressed
depending on the environment it has to withstand. In microorganisms, a shift in
population most suited to the new environment takes place. This indirectly implies
the reason of higher genetic load that higher organisms have to carry as an insurance
cover. In lower organisms like bacteria, due to their much shorter life-cycle,
there is hardly any scope of adaptation, mutation rules the roost. Fungi, as a
group are placed much higher in the evolutionary ladder (eukaryote) than bacteria
(prokaryote) and have tackled this situation in a distinctive way. Some are
coenocytic i.e., do not have any cross wall (septa) in the hypha and free flow of
nuclei takes place in the thallus. The rest are with definite septa. However,
presence of pore in the septa provides passage to the migration of nuclei in the
hypahe. This is the group where C. falcatum belongs. The other (basidiomycetes)
which is considered most evolved group among the fungi has also scuttled this
situation by developing a clamp connection, which bypasses the septal apparatus
and helps in the migration of nuclei. The advantages of heterokaryosis
Variability and race identification 55
(multiplication and maintenance of different types of nuclei in the same thallus in
addition to the native nuclei) and free migration of nuclei within the hypha gives
an illusion (of adaptation) to this effect. However, it is to be noted that the adaptive
enzymes also play a definitive role in most of the situations. The genes for these
enzymes are present in the pathogen and these enzymes occur in a very minute
quantity, often at a level beyond detection with common detection tools methods.
However, the genes governing the production of these enzymes are activated
when a particular situation arises especially when the fungus needs their activity
to increase its fitness. The discovery of the operation of lactose operon supported
the active operation of this phenomenon, which earlier was thought as an adaptation.
Parasexuality
The parasexuality, a mechanism of getting benefit of sexual mechanism
(recombination of genes) without involving the mechanism of meiosis, is third
most important means in the maintenance of variability to the desired level. In
the parasexual process, occasionally two haploid nuclei fuse and give rise to
diploid nucleus. Subsequently multiplication of diploid nucleus takes place. Thus,
at a given point of time a thallus contains a mixture of haploid and diploid nuclei.
Mitotic recombinations provide an opportunity of crossing over and development
of new genetic recombinant at any part of the thallus. If this new hypha bearing
the recombinant is more fit in the environment, it proliferates and signifies the
improvement in the variability of the pathogen.
Sexual mechanism
Sexual reproduction (diplodization followed by meiosis- producing haploid
ascospores in a typical 8 spored ascus) is operative in Glomerella tucumanensis.
However, not much credence has been given to it for the generation of variability
leading to the development of new pathogenic races responsible for the failure of
the sugarcane genotypes. In the first, owing to the homothallic nature of the
fungus, occurrence of high variability through sexual mechanism is not expected
and the sexual state is mostly restricted to the leaf; and the leaf isolates are
usually not capable of infecting the sugarcane stalk. However, this does not close
the door for the development of new virulent races. It is assumed that occasionally
an odd recombinant/mutant acquires the capability of infecting the stalk and
gradually establishes itself in the alien environment of the stalk. This ultimately
kills the stalk. Death of the cane plant reduces the availability of food to the leaf
population, and thus poses imminent survival problem for the entire population.
As observed by the author, C. falcatum isolates obtained from the stalk are shy in
producing perithecia in artificial condition of the laboratory, whereas leaf/mid-
rib isolates have no such qualms.
Variability and race identification56
In spite of the inherent simplicity of homothallism, complexity of
parasexuality, heterokaryosis and ubiquitous mutation provide the much-needed
variability to C. falcatum to match the genetic complexity of sugarcane. Still it
remained unexplained, how new resistant varieties suddenly succumb to the
pathogen without any noticeable occurrence of disease in the crop. It is obvious
that some kind of surreptitious spread of the pathogen is occurring in nature and
effecting sudden failure of a resistant cane genotype in a larger area.
Race flora
For successful breeding of disease resistant genotypes and their deployment,
a clear picture of race flora of the pathogen and their geographical distribution is
essential. The disease resistant genotypes in turn are essential to contain the
disease in more eco-friendly and effective manner. Colletotrichum falcatum has
different forms varying in virulence and pathogenicity. This variation drew
immediate attention of even the earliest worker on this disease. Earlier sugarcane
planters also noticed that varieties differ not only in their growth characteristics
but also in their behaviour regarding pests and diseases (Watt, 1893). This situation
prompted frequent introduction of sugarcane varieties from different places
(districts, states and country). The variation in the pathogen put pressure by
curtailing the field life of a cane variety and thus, necessitated quick replacement.
With the advancement in sugarcane breeding, emphasis was given for breeding
resistant varieties against the pathogen. The development of interspecific hybrids
(use of wild Saccharum spontaneum as the source of resistance) is the milestone
in this regard.  Indeed, the unsurpassed impact of sugarcane breeding in India
paved the way in reviving sugar industry. This remained the first Green revolution
(mostly unsung, except the Knighthood of Sir T. S. Venkatraman) in India. This
spectacular success of breeding hybrid cane increased the sugarcane area
tremendously, until it was hit badly by the red rot. More emphasis was laid to
breed varieties resistant to this disease but often met with varied success. The
erratic behaviour of C. falcatum in artificial culture, frequent loss of sporulation
as well as pathogenicity always put the pathologists on the back foot. It became
difficult to ascertain the virulence over crop seasons. Workers resorted to collect
available variability each year and used the most virulent (aggressive) one from
the collection for the screening purpose (Chona, 1954). At SBI, Coimbatore
workers resorted to use only ‘D’ strain for long a time with the consideration that
if a variety is resistant to ‘D’ strain it will have adequate resistance to other
strains. In later years, however it was realised that resistance to ‘D’ strain is not
uniform at all endemic locations and resistance of a genotype is dependent upon
the composition of the local red rot flora used for testing (Alexander and Rao,
1976).
Variability and race identification 57
For 11 years (from 1992-2002), the author has studied the stability of
pathotype Cf 01 in normal cultivation without putting any selection pressure.
Each year, 8 rows (15 m long) were planted with healthy and naturally infected
cane setts (Co 1148) without any selection, whatsoever. At the end of the crop
year (March) the plot was harvested and these canes were used for planting. No
selection of cane or cane sett was done. It was observed that the incidence of the
disease hovered around 10-20%. Every year, isolation was made from the
affected canes and virulence/aggressiveness was tested on the designated
differentials. It was observed that aggressiveness of Cf 01 also varied in different
years, but there was always an availability of isolates with high aggressiveness.
A perpetual question still haunts the minds of sugarcane pathologists.  If
C. falcatum looses its virulence so quickly, then how the stability of a race could
be established, and will it be prudent to call it a race. Time and again, newly
released resistant genotypes succumbed to the red rot, whenever any matching
virulent isolate surfaced on the scene and knocked the genotype with impunity,
leaving no option but to phase out the genotype from general cultivation. Thus,
the average field life of a sugarcane variety hardly exceeds 8-10 years before the
assault of red rot (Table 7.1). This intrinsic variability prompted earlier workers
to group the C. falcatum isolates (variability) for better understanding and
management. Initial grouping was based on growth and sporulation. Pathogen
flora was classified into two broad groups, viz., a less virulent (less aggressive),
Table  7.1 Field life of a few popular sugarcane varieties in the subtropical
belt of India
Variety Year of release Year of withdrawal / 
succumbed to red rot 
Duration  
in years 
Co 210 1918 (UP) 1932 14 
Co 213 1918(UP) 1933 15 
Co 312 1928(UP) 1946 18 
Co 313 1928(UP) 1936 8 
Co 419 1936(UP) 1948 12 
Co 453 1947(UP) 1958 11 
BO 3 1959(UP) 1967 8 
BO 10 1958(UP) 1965 7 
Co 997 1967(UP) 1969 2 
Co 1148 1962(UP) 1980 18 
Co 7717  1978 (Haryana)
 1980 2 
CoS 767 1979(UP) 1991 12 
CoS 770 1977(UP) 1981 4 
CoJ 64 1971(UP) 1979 8 
 
Variability and race identification58
dark race which was predominant in the pre-interspecific hybrid era (dark velvety
mycelium, sparse sporulation) and the light race, the highly virulent type which
was prevalent on the hybrid canes (white mycelium, heavy sporulation).
The concept of physiologic specialization in red rot pathogen dates back to
1935 when Abbott (1935) from Louisiana reported that red rot isolates form two
morphologically distinct groups - one dark velvety non sporulating and the other,
lighter, sporulating and usually capable of infection on inoculation. He developed
an interesting theory in this regard, and believed that origin of the two types of
races was the cause of failure of POJ 213 and CP 807. POJ 213 was affected by
the light type badly, whereas CP 807 showed greater susceptibility to the dark
type. He postulated that the dark type might be the original type, which thrived
well on the old noble canes, and the light type has evolved due to the increase in
area of the new hybrid POJ 213. Moreover, dark races were prevalent in the
southern states (syrup districts) where old varieties (noble canes) were still being
grown.  However, peer groups did not support his hypothesis as indicated by
Edgerton (1959)
“From the evidence available, it would seem that this theory is not entirely
acceptable. During the long period in which red rot was kept under close observation
in Louisiana, epiphytotics varying in severity, occurred from time to time, and in
general, cultures which were isolated and proved to be highly pathogenic, sporulated
profusely. There is no evidence indicating that the organisms involved in the
epiphytotics, such as occurred in 1923 and 1927 were morphologically different from
those present in later years.”
Similar observations were also made in India. Chona and Padwick (1942)
indicated that the epidemic of 1938-39 resulted a new highly virulent light type
isolate, which was responsible for the failure of Co 213. Rafay (1953), Chona
(1954), Kirtikar (1960) and others also have reported the variation in the pathogen
in terms of morphology and pathogenicity on different cane genotypes. Kirtikar
(from Shahjahanpur) designated the variation in R series, like R 141, R 200 etc.,
whereas Rafay (from Lucknow), Chona (from New Delhi) and others grouped
them as A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, and I stains of C. falcatum (Table 7.2). However,
there was no consensus among the workers in this regard. Due to the overlapping
morphological groupings it was extremely difficult to put a C. falcatum isolate in
the above categories. In spite of the problems, there had been only few instances
where there was no difference of opinion in classifying C. falcatum isolates.
This happened only with the more stable isolates of C. falcatum.  During the past
one hundred years of red rot research in India, only a few isolates could remain
stable for a reasonable length of time retaining their pathogenicity in artificial
culture. The prominent five strains were the ‘D’ strain (isolated from Co 453),
Variability and race identification 59
‘I’ strain (isotated from BO 11), strain 244 (isolated from Co 312), the Jagadhari
isolate (from Co 1148, later designated as race Cf 01) and an isolate from Co 419
(later designated as race Cf 04). It is to be noted that the initial isolation characters
of strain ‘D’, ‘I’ and Cf 01 were very similar - all were highly sporulating,
covering the media with spore mass but with very sparse mycelium.
Epidemic : arrival of a new race
The formation of new virulences of C. falcatum is always taking place in
nature and their prevalence is guided by the sugarcane varieties in cultivation. In
an epidemic, a new pathogenic isolate/strain prevails in a wide area affecting
the cane variety. Even today, no satisfactory answer could be given regarding
Table 7.2 Strain designation of C. falcatum prior to 1992
Strain Character 
A Colony cottony to floccose, white in colour during first two weeks and 
assumes very light tint of grey with age. Slimy pink masses of conidia are 
absent. 
B Colony is loose and silky. Abundant spore masses ar e seen on aerial 
mycelium, w hile abundant salmon coloured slimy masses of conidi a are 
produced on the surface of the medium. Old cultures e xhibit a relatively 
more compact texture. 
C Colony is compact and velvety and is darker than ty pe ‘A’. Conidia are 
produced in pink masses spari ngly with a tendency to confine themselves 
to the margins of the media, representing an interme diate stage between 
‘A’ and ‘B’. 
D The colony texture is loose with sparse aerial myce lium. The slimy masses 
of conidia are abundant, covering 50 per cent or mo re of the surface of the 
medium. 
E Mycelium is velvety in texture with sparse sporulat ion. 
F Mycelium is cottony, which turns grey with age, with  moderate 
production of conidia.  
G Aerial mycelium is dark grey and profuse with very l ess conidial 
production. 
H Mycelium is loose and silky with pseudopycnidial masse s of conidia on the 
surface. 
I Aerial mycelium is scanty, whole surface of the medi um is covered with 
conidial mass. 
 
Variability and race identification60
the origin of a new race and its wide coverage, affecting the prospect of a cane
variety. It is often assumed that this new virulent pathotype is a mutant of existing
strain(s). It is not clearly known whether highly pathogenic strains develop as a
result of changes in the vegetative mycelium through anastomosis, conidial fusion
or from ascosporic inoculum. However, ascosporic inoculum did not get much
credence due to homothallic nature of the genus Colletotrichum.
It has been experienced by different workers repeatedly that whenever a
popular sugarcane genotype succumbed to red rot in the field - invariably a new
red rot pathotype has emerged having capability to breach the introduced
resistance of that genotype. However, it is interesting to note that after the epidemic
years, only one or two isolates have been obtained with the desired level of
virulence required to knock down the variety in question. There was never a
preponderance of variability, even at the flare up situation, which is contrary to
the normal expectation that sheer population explosion of the pathogen will favour
the generation of an array of variability. It is not necessary that the new pathotype
is more capable to attack other genotypes as well. In several cases, a reduction
in virulence was  also observed (Chona, 1954). The occurrence of increased
virulence may be due to the spectrum of varieties having same or similar
background of genes governing resistance to red rot. It is on record that only a
few of S. spontaneum clones have been utilized for the introduction of hardiness
as well as resistance in sugarcane breeding and that too at the beginning of the
interspefic hybrid-era. Subsequently, sugarcane breeders used the advantage of
high heterozygosity of sugarcane, and resorted to an easier and more feasible
approach of crossing between the hybrids and evaluating the selected progenies
for their tolerance to red rot rather than following the difficult path of direct
crossing with S. spontaneum with less chance of getting commercial hybrids.
This approach, no doubt, has made significant progress in developing sugarcane
varieties in quick successions but at the same time introduced an inborn weakness
(narrow genetic base; permutations and combinations of same genes) to the
varieties, which led to their quick phasing out of cultivation due to red rot. It has
also resulted in a plateauing effect in sugarcane productivity in terms of both
yield and quality. This situation has given birth to the apprehension that high
sugar is associated with red rot susceptibility, overlooking the fact that
S. officinarum contributing 90% of the chromosomes in the hybrid is susceptible
to red rot. It is evident that simple reshufflings of genes governing resistance to
red rot will not stand long with the enormous capability of the pathogen in
developing variation in virulence.
Variability and race identification 61
Light type vs dark type
The other moot point that one is bound to consider is the frequent change of
the light type isolates into the dark type. Changes are too common to be overlooked
(Plate 18c, d), and in fact, it is major problem in the maintenance of C. falcatum
cultures in virulent form. Edgerton (1959) described it, as :
“In old cultures, spots appear containing dark coloured mycelium, which sporulate
sparingly. It is assumed that these result from mutation. Gradually, as transfers are
made from these cultures, the dark coloured mutants become dominant and replace
the original type. Generally, isolates which have been kept in culture for a year or
more are dark coloured. Usually such cultures sporulate sparingly, or not at all and
commonly show a low degree of pathogenicity.”
Every worker, who has put his hand on red rot pathogen has experienced
that a dark velvety mycelial patch often develops in the slant culture or petridish
culture (Plate 18c, d). The dark velvety area looses the sporulating ability and
remains stable over subculturing. This is an indication of the doom of the isolate
in terms of virulence. To circumvent this inherent changing nature of red rot
pathogen in artificial culture, subculturing is done by picking up the spores from
the slant culture or petridish culture, and religiously passaging through the host,
as a sieve (possibly needs an impetus to retain genes for pathogenicity) to
encourage the selective multiplication of the virulent form. Therefore, each year,
inoculation and reisolation from the host, early in the season, remains one of the
important activities to retain pathogen in virulent and sporulating form. Even
with all the precautions, off and on, some isolates loose virulence. However, it
has also been observed that some of the velvety cultures when inoculated also
showed pathogenicity. The change of the pathogen to nonsporulating velvety form
indicates a gloomy future, as without sporulation it looses its capability of
secondary spread through the conidia. In the past, workers have used the most
virulent isolate (indicated by the capability of knocking down maximum number
of cane genotypes in the collection) for the screening of resistance types among
the selections/ varieties (Chona, 1954).
The cultural characters of the isolates as described by Srinivasan (1962b)
reflect the general situation of variability in C. falcatum. The cultures on their
first isolation could be classified into four morphological types based on the spore
bearing structures and occurrence of setae in the acervuli.
Type I cultures
Aerial mycelium white, scanty, appressed; conidia borne singly on
vegetative hyphae, occasionally in a chain of two conidia, falcate, thin-walled
15-42 µm x 4.2-8 m; conidial germination typical of the species viz., by forming
Variability and race identification62
a septum in the middle of the conidium and developing an appressorium at the
end of a short germ tube. This type is rarely encountered.
Type II cultures
Aerial mycelium floccose, white in young cultures; conidial masses
appearing in one to two weeks, salmon orange, slimy, acervuli devoid of setae;
conidia falcate, 15-36 µm x 4.2-(7)-8 m.
Type III cultures
Aerial mycelium floccose, white in young cultures; sporulation in one to
two weeks; acervuli appearing black at first, surrounded by setae, later developing
conidial masses of vinaceous colour; conidia falcate, 17-33 µm x 2-6 m.
Type IV cultures
Aerial mycelium scanty, colourless; acervuli borne on black stromata of
thick walled polygonal brown cell, 0.2-0.8 mm dia and up to 1 mm in height;
acervuli surrounded by setae and developing conidial masses of vinaceous colour;
conidia falcate, 17-33 µm x 2-6 m. This type is also rarely encountered.
Except type I, which is less virulent (aggressive), all the types are virulent.
The type I and type IV type did not change in cultural types even after 15
transfers whereas within 3 transfers type II and type III cultures gave rise to
cultures with a felt-like, smoky grey mycelium, almost devoid of acervuli with
poor sporulation (Table 7.3). The other (light type) continued to give rise to cultures
resembling the parental type. Dark sectors did occasionally arise in the cultures,
but monoconidial transfers from the light area resulted in continuance of the
latter without change in morphological type.
Table 7.3 Stability of pathogenicity and virulence of C. falcatum after
repeated subculturings
(Adapted from Srinivasan, 1962)
Variety Co 213 
Virulence reaction 
R MR MS S HS 
At the time of isolation (type II)    2 4 
After 10 subculturings  3 1 - 1 1 
At the time of isolation (type III)    14 19 
After 10 subculturings  20 5 - 3 5 
Total after 10 subculturings 23 6 - 4 6 
 59% 15.4% - 10.2% 15.4% 
 
Variability and race identification 63
RACE IDENTIFICATION
The development of red rot isolates capable of knocking down the dominant
genotype Co 1148 in Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh, and succumbing of
early high sugar genotype, Co 997 in Andhra Pradesh forced several workers
(Satyanaraya and Satynarayana from Anakapalle, Satyavir and co-workers from
Haryana and Alexander from SBI, Coimbatore) to look into the issue of pathogen
variability. Satyanaraya and Satynarayana (1976) observed that red rot isolate
from Co 997 did not infect CoC 671 and vice versa, so was the case with Co 1148
and Co 7717 as observed by Satyavir and his co-workers. Alexander and his
co-workers identified five major pathotypes of C. falcatum prevalent in India,
viz., MP 1 to MP 5. MP 1 and MP 2 prevalent Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh,
respectively; MP3 in eastern U.P. and Bihar; MP 4 in western U.P., Haryana
and Punjab and MP 5 was prevalent in Kerala. This type of classification of
pathotypes based on cane growing zones did not hold for long, as variation of the
pathogen was not limited by the geographical location, rather it was dependent
on the spectrum of sugarcane varieties in cultivation.
Alexander and his associates in SBI, Coimbatore and Vijay Singh at IISR,
Lucknow also tried serology to establish any possible relationship between
serological groups and pathological groups of C. falcatum. However, no conclusive
results emanated from their studies. It is obvious that existence of a direct
relationship betwen food habit and surface proteins is not generally available in
nature.
Breeding for stable resistance needs efficient screening against the probable
virulence of the pathogen that the new genotype is going to face in its field life.
C. falcatum is also notorious in losing (shedding) virulence in artificial culture.
This intrinsic variable nature of the pathogen always introduced certain level of
uncertainty in the mind of pathologists about the outcome of inoculation with
cultures that have undergone several subculturings. Obviously, this guided the
development of standard procedure of revival of virulence (aggressiveness) by
passaging the culture through inoculation early in the season (each year).
Unfortunately, the intrinsic variable nature of C. falcatum did not allow developing
a consensus among the breeders and pathologists in this regard.
The work on identification of pathotypes of C. falcatum, at all India level
was initiated under the umbrella of AICRP (Sugarcane) in 1984-85 and
Dr.  K. C. Alexander, as Principal investigator of the pathology group, took the
lead. Data on pathogenic variability on a set of designated cane genotypes were
collected and it was discussed thoroughly in the subsequent AICRP (S) meetings.
Variability and race identification64
In 1992, in the meeting of AICRP (Sugarcane) at IISR, Lucknow under the
Chairmanship of the then ADG (Crop Protection) Dr. S. Nagarajan, a workable
system of virulence mapping for C. falcatum was chalked out. Obviously, the
basic input was from Dr. K. C. Alexander (PI, Pathology) and the scientists
from different centres contributed to it. The group finalised a set of designated
differentials and designated races for validating the pathogenicity data from
different locations and environments (Table 7.4). Accordingly, three north Indian
isolates and three south Indian isolates were selected for testing at all India level
for stability in different environments. The isolate from Co 1148 was named as
Cf 01, isolate from Co 7717 got the designation Cf 02 and so an isolate from
CoJ 64 was designated Cf 03. These three designated races were for subtropical
region. The red rot isolate from Co 419, the wonder cane of India, received the
designation Cf 04; similarly an isolate obtained from Co 997 was termed Cf 05
and the isolate from early high sugar genotype CoC 671 got the designation
Cf 06. The six designated pathotypes typically produced HS (S+) reaction with
the matching genotype. These six representative cane genotypes were taken as
Table 7.4. Tentative key for characterising Colletotrichum falcatum strains/
pathotypes characterised on differentials (1992, AICRP(S))
NWZ = North western zone, ECR = East Coastal region, Cf – stands for Colletotrichum falcatum
Reactions are grouped into two main categories for the reasons of convenience. However, finer details of
reactions are designated by using symbols as “+” and “-”. For example, MR is recorded here as R- and MS
reaction as S- and HS as S+ etc. This indicates if the reactions are on the higher or lower side of the designation.
R and S are features of the isolate (resistance/ susceptible).
Cf01 = Differentiated on Khakai, Co 975/Co 7717
Cf02 = Differentiated on Khakai, Co 975, Co 1148/CoC 671, Co 7717
Cf03 = Differentiated on Khakai, Co 975, Co 997, Co 1148/CoC 671, Co 7717
Cf04 = Differentiated on Co 7717, Co 419
Cf05 = Differentiated on Co 7717, Co 419
Cf06 = Differentiated on Baragua
Designated differentials 
Sources/location of 
isolates 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 
Designated 
race 
Source/ 
Location 
Baragua Khakai SES 
594 
Co 
975 
Co 
62399 
CoS 
767 
BO 
91 
Co 
1148 
Co 
7717 
CoJ 
64 
Co 
419 
Co 
997 
CoC   
671 
Cf 01 Co 1148  
NWZ 
R S R - S S R R S R S  S S 
Cf 02 Co 7717 
NWZ 
R R - R R - S - R R R- S S -  S S 
Cf 03 CoJ 64 
NWZ 
R R - R - R R- R R R- R S  S R 
Cf 04 Co 419 
ECR 
R- S R S R- R- R S S S+ S+ S - S 
Cf 05 Co 997 
ECR 
R S - R S+ R- R- R S - R- S - R S+ S+ 
Cf 06 CoC671 
ECR 
S S - R S - R- R R S - R- S R- S+ S+ 
 
Variability and race identification 65
the maintainers of virulence. For the differentials three species representative
viz., SES 594 (S. spontaneum), Khakai (S. sinense) and Baragua (S. officinarum)
were taken. For the differentiation of north Indian isolates Co 975 and for south
Indian isolates Co 62399 were also taken. BO 91 and CoS 767 were added as the
next two vulnerable genotypes, as any occurrence of red rot will jeopardize their
cultivation affecting major area in the subtropical belt and will force a modification
in the designated race identification system. The identification of designated races
was felt necessary to systematize the disease resistance breeding and the
deployment of the cane genotypes in any particular area depending on the non
availability/prevalence of the matching designated race.
Single window testing
The other important aspect was to explore the possibility of single window
testing of the cane genotypes to avoid any variation regarding their resistance
behaviour, as it is often influenced by various conditions prevailing in different
locations. This indiscriminate behaviour of this host-pathogen combination often
became bone of contention and bickering between pathologists and breeders; as
in most of the cases, an excellent genotype often failed to get a berth due to non-
possession of appreciable resistance against the prevalent races of C. falcatum.
Breeders often felt like ‘sinking of a ship at the shore, after crossing all the rough
waters’ and always tried to push a genotype to scale the red rot wall. Breeders,
many a times tested the integrity of pathologists, by providing a clone with different
numbers in the same year or in different years for evaluation of the resistance
against red rot. And many a times, discrepancies did arise putting a big question
regarding the accuracy of evaluation.
As observed earlier races of red rot are mostly variety specific with
geographic limitations. They are distinctly different so far as tropical and sub-
tropical agro-climates are concerned. Under the aegis of AICRP(S), trials were
conducted for this purpose. Designated differentials were raised at the
participating centres and differentials were inoculated with the same designated
races using plug method. As expected, there was hardly any variation in the
disease reaction due to the variation in environment. Response of any individual
genotype, irrespective of the designated race used for inoculation, behaved in
same fashion and variation was limited to fluctuation of 1 unit in 0-9 point scale.
This has opened up a new possibility of single window testing of cane genotypes
at the pre-release stage. Two central institutes viz., IISR, Lucknow for the
subtropical region and SBI, Coimbatore for the tropical region may act as the
testing window for red rot. In the meeting of AICRP(S) of 1992, it was also
emphasized to maintain a repository of C. falcatum pathotypes at IISR, Lucknow
and its exact replica at SBI, Coimbatore to facilitate uniform testing of cane
Variability and race identification66
genotypes. In a prelude to this, working cultures of C. falcatum pathotypes are
now being exchanged among the participating centres of the zone for the purpose
of evaluation (with strict vigilance, so that no such pathotypes get a chance to
escape from the research stations). Now the onus rests on the breeders and
pathologists to work in tandem and to streamline the system of varietal testing
against red rot, varietal identification as well as deployment of cane genotypes
according to the prevalence of pathotypes in the specific zone. It is now necessary
to give more emphasis on survey and surveillance to monitor the change in the
variability pattern across the country and make interim corrections in the
composition of pathotypes to be used for screening in the sugarcane varietal
development programme.
Of late, five more races have been designated (Cf 07, Cf 08 and Cf 11
from CoJ 64 ; Cf 09 from CoS 767, and Cf 10 from the clone 85A261). The
isolation and establishment of four pathotypes (Cf 03, Cf 07, Cf 08 and Cf 11)
having varied virulence (CoJ 64) have put a question on the development of new
virulence in nature. Have these pathotypes originated independently or shared
the same origin with minor modifications in virulence pattern or all these CoJ 64
isolates owe their origin to the isolates of Co 1148? Alexander and Rao (1976)
also made similar observations with different collections of so called ‘D’ isolate
from different places. The instability of the isolates on artificial culture often
poses a question regarding the tenability of races, but so far, no satisfactory
answer could be given to explain the phenomenon. There is an urgent need to
develop the differentials, preferably gene based and to strengthen the system of
race identification so that the number of races for which any breeder will target
the resistance breeding, is attainble.
On a closer look at the designated race grid (Table 7.4) it is evident that
the highly virulent isolate of Co 419 (Cf 04) has paved the way for the less virulent
ones (Cf 05 and Cf 06). So is the case with north Indian isolates Cf 01 (Co 1148)
isolate paved the way for the less virulent Cf 02 (Co7717 isolate) and Cf 03
(CoJ 64 isolate). It is obvious that fitness of a particular isolate in the target
environment counts most, and gets precedence over virulence. Duttamajumder
and Verma (1994) with cotton-Xanthomonas malvacearum system, have shown
that in a given location where an array of resistant and susceptible host genotypes
are available, less virulent types of the pathogen predominates the race picture
on barbadense cotton (with less number of genes for resistance) whereas, more
virulent types survived better on hirsutum cotton (more number of genes for
resistance). Due to the limitation in the fitness, highly virulent types, available in
the same location could not get much foothold on the barbadense cotton, whereas
less virulent ones having more fitness on barbendense cotton got established.
Variability and race identification 67
In the past, most virulent strains of C. falcatum available in the collection
of the pathologists were used for the screening purpose (Chona, 1954); over the
years it has become apparent that targeting resistance, only for the highly virulent
type will not suffice. A broad based resistance is essential to sustain the field life
of a variety. It is obvious that all the highly susceptible S. officinarum clones,
available in the germplasm collection are probably due to slow red rot
development in the field condition (as none of the officinarum type was found in
the wild).  It is also apparent that the prevalent practice of screening of only the
selected progenies (good agronomic quality) for resistance will not solve the
problem. A good amount of progenies with appreciable resistance is always left
out due to their moderate performance in yield and quality. Again, there is no
guarantee that the new resistant genotype bred against the prevalent races will
survive longer in the field. There is every possibility that the newer genotype
may go down with even a pathotype having very low relative virulence but is
highly virulent in specific gene combination(s) matching the new genotype. Time
and again, the epidemics of red rot have shown the appearance of a specific kind
of variation in the pathogen; the variation, that is most detrimental to the genotype.
Each epidemic yielded a new virulent type and that too a stable one! However, at
the same time it is also on record that in spite of the explosive population increase
during the epidemic, usually one virulent pathotype has been encountered.
Obviously, epidemiological mutations are rare, and this provides an opportunity
to manage the disease through other means. It indicates the necessity of
deployment of a large number of cane genotypes varying in resistance, in a
particular cane growing area to form a mosaic pattern in the fields and a quick
replacement of any genotype showing any attack of red rot. The deployment of
cane genotype, clean cultivations in addition to the broadening of the genetic base
of red rot resistance will go a long way to contain the perpetual flare up of red rot
in India. It may be relevant to mention that there have been instances where a
variety declared susceptible (CoJ 64, Co 86032) to red rot and recommended as
‘not suitable’ for commercial release survived in the field for a quite long time.
The success of CoJ 64 rests much on the clean seed programme, which is often
misinterpreted as operation of field resistance. In any perennial crop, disease
resistance has evolved in the direction of horizontal resistance (field resistance)
as necessitated for its long time survival. However, both types of resistance
coexist in a fashion that provides greater stability of a genotype against the
pathogens prevalent in specific geographical location. The race specific
susceptibility is always vertical. For that matter, whether the variety in question
is CoJ 64, Co 86032 or Co 1148, horizontal resistance is in built and they all ward
off other races except the matching ones.
Disease resistance68
8
DISEASE RESISTANCE
Disease resistance: the rule of nature
In nature, resistance against the pathogen is the rule and susceptibility is
the exception. In the living world, those who cannot produce food on their own
are dependent on the green plant (directly or indirectly) for their food requirement.
A majority of the microorganisms live as saprophytes, leading their life on the
dead plants or plant refuse. Only a few, which have acquired the capability of
attacking the green plants cause disease and inflict damage. In general, plants
have in-built resistance against hoards of microorganisms and only in specific
conditions favouring the pathogen, disease occurs.
The contribution of disease resistant varieties in present-day agriculture is
immense. Improvement in yield and quality usually accompanied the resistant
variety. Better and normal growth of crop requires intrinsic improvement,
irrespective of the factors of resistance. Farmers provide better care to a crop
that shows promise. Certainly, the varieties that have gained ready acceptance
invariably have improved commercial quality and high yield potential along with
disease resistance. Disease resistance always provides sustainability to any crop
production system. It has not only increased the food security but also has provided
an opportunity in planning the crop with greater confidence. With the resistant
varieties, even if the crop is somewhat less yielding, there is certainly something
to harvest in contrast to the susceptible varieties. Sugarcane is no exception in
this regard and disease resistance has served sugar industry of different countries
and many a times has infused a new lease of life. Notably, the resistance to
‘Sereh’ saved the sugar industry of Java in 1890’s. So was the case with sugar
industry of United States of America, where resistance to mosaic and root rot
saved the sugar industry in 1920’s. Similarly, in India, resistance to red rot has
Disease resistance 69
changed the face of Indian sugarcane; from perpetuating epidemic and crop
failure, the country has entered into a realm of stability in sugarcane production.
The primary prerequisite for breeding disease resistance for any crop is
the availability of sources of resistance and ease in the transfer of genes in the
resultant hybrids. The success of such gene transfer depends on (i) source of
resistance; (ii) amenability of genes governing resistance to such transfer as
well as their expression in the new background, (iii) heritability of such genes,
(iv) reliable method of assessment of resistance and finally (v) how frequently
introduced resistance is breached by the pathogen (durability of resistance).
Unfortunately, resistance sources against red rot in the collection of
sugarcane germplasm are limited and high degree of resistance nearing immunity
is not available. The flow of new resistant cane varieties is not able to keep pace
with the development of new variations in the red rot pathogen leading to frequent
shortage of cane genotypes for replacement. The development of varieties fortified
with durable resistance is cumbersome due to the involvement of a large number
of genes for resistance. Further, high ploidy level and herterozygosity of the
cane crop have complicated the breeding for red rot resistance. Being of semi-
perennial nature, sugarcane has an in-built system of horizontal resistance that
helps it to tide over the adverse conditions from season to season and from year
to year.
Information on the inheritance of red rot resistance in sugarcane is rather
sketchy. There is no clear-cut pattern of inheritance that one can embark upon.
The inheritance, as known today, is indiscriminate as crosses between resistant
and susceptible clones in all possible combinations (RxR, SxR, SxS and
reciprocals) give rise to some resistant plants (Azab and Chilton, 1952, 1959).
Degree of resistance of parents makes little difference to the percentage of
resistant progenies, however, variations do occur in certain cross combinations.
In sugarcane, the best-known source of resistance to red rot is S. spontaneum
and most of the present day commercial hybrids owe their red rot resistance to
it. However, except the initial involvement of a few spontaneum clones in the
crossing programme, very little has been done to tap this potential resistant donor.
Of late, a programme (ISH development) to broaden the genetic base of the
parental pool was run at SBI, Coimbatore and several clones with new gene/
gene combinations have come up from this effort. It is hoped that a structured
programme at the national level be started to introduce an array of genes from
the wild relatives like S. spontaneum, S. robustum and Erianthus sp. to tackle the
problems of pests and diseases as well as the problems of drought and
waterlogging.
Disease resistance70
Horizontal vs vertical resistance
The concept of ‘horizontal’ and ‘vertical’ resistance needs a little elaboration
to dispel the misconception prevailing among the sugarcane breeders and
pathologists. A resistance gene in the host is identified by the corresponding
virulence allele, not the avirulence allele, at a corresponding locus in the pathogen.
That is, it is identified in a state of susceptibility, not resistance. An erroneous
belief in specific resistance, as distinct from specific resistance genes, has led to
much “barking up the wrong tree”. Among the examples of misdirected “barking”
are the phytoalexin and hypersensitivity theories of the host-pathogen specificity
(Vanderplank, 1984).
The more the involvement of resistance genes, the clearer it becomes that
susceptibility is specific and resistance unspecific i.e. there is race-specific
susceptibility but not race specific resistance. In a modest 10-gene system, the
possibility of races is 210 = 1024. Is it possible to target all the races in resistance
breeding? In fact, a plant having all the 10-resistance genes is susceptible only to
race 1 to 10 and is resistant to rest of the possible races (provided there is no
interaction among these resistance genes). This remains the main target at the
resistance breeding to counteract the virulence of the pathogen; not to increase
the level of resistance of host.
Flor (1953, 1956) documented contradictions between observations in the
field and greenhouse. In the field, unnecessary virulence reduced the fitness of
the pathogen. He analysed field surveys (USA) of the flax rust fungus Melampsora
lini from 1931 to 1951 and arrived at the conclusion that with the introduction of
more resistant flax cultivars more virulent races of M. lini appeared. Moreover,
the most prevalent races were those possessing the least number of virulence
genes compatible with survival, i.e. compatible with the ability to attack the
popular cultivars. Throughout the period of his analysis the percentage of isolates
of M. lini carrying unnecessary genes for virulence, i.e. gene enabling them to
attack cultivars not grown commercially, decreased. Greenhouse and laboratory
experiments are dangerous in matters relating to the comparative fitness of
phenotypes to survive in populations of pathogens in a fluctuating environment as
available in nature.
Flor worked with autocious rust- an obligate parasite, and there was no
question of artificial culturing. (It would be of interest to note that Flor in the
early part of his career worked on sugarcane).  In case of Colletotrichum falcatum,
it sheds its virulence at different generations of subculturing on different substrates
like the most commonly used media oatmeal agar - obviously the gene(s) governing
pathogenicity are no longer needed for fitness in the saprophytic environment of
petridish, wherein abundant food is available and that too without any competition.
Disease resistance 71
The boom and bust cycle is well known in disease management. When a
new gene governing resistance is introduced through a new variety, the acreage
of the new variety increases but at a certain point, pathogen makes inroads in this
new genotype and the introduced resistance is breached. Mutation is the key for
the change in the pathogen and is responsible for increasing the fitness of the
pathogen in that particular environment developed due to the introduced resistance.
Without preference for any allele, allele frequency is maintained in the population
to the tune of mutation rate. If the virulence allele is more fit than the avirulence
allele, its frequency in the wild-type population will exceed the mutation rate. If
it is better fitted in the new situation, over generations the virulence allele would
eventually cover the entire population (an epidemic situation).
Ideally a successful disease resistant breeding programme is one whose
outcome i.e., a new resistant cultivar, is accepted by the farmers and commands
substantial acreage, giving the pathogen little scope for survival. It does so without
incurring epidemiological mutations in the pathogen. Of the kinds of mutation,
epidemiological mutation is the only one in which the frequency of mutation per
unit of the pathogen, e.g. per million or billion of spores, depends on the area of
cultivation of the host. The pathogen population always remains in a state of flux.
Recurrent mutations with local flares of virulence in different loci remain the
key in the survival of the pathogen. Most of the flares simply die out like
matchstick. Occasionally some flares catch on to become the conflagration called
‘epidemic’.
Vanderplank (1963) used illustration for the two possible types of resistance
that a host plant can have. Horizontal resistance is expressed uniformly against
races of the pathogen; and vertical resistance is expressed differentially. He
explained the situation with potato varieties Kennebec and Maritta, and late blight
pathogen Phytophthora infestans. Both these varieties possess resistance gene
R1 (resistance gene is identified on the basis of susceptibility) which confers
resistance to race no. 0,2,3,4 and combinations of  (2,3), (2,4), (3,4) and (2,3,4).
It does not confer resistance to race 1, or any combination with race 1 i.e., (1,2),
(1,3), (1,4), (1,2,3), (1,2,4) and (1,2,3,4). The resistance conferred by the gene
R1 is expressed differentially against the races and is vertical. Against the races
to which the gene R1 does not confer resistance, Kennebec and Maritta behave
differently. Kennebec succumbed faster to blight than Maritta. Grown side by
side, Kennebec is blighted brown while Maritta is still mainly green. Maritta
has more “field resistance” or “horizontal resistance”. In the graphical
representation where there is no vertical resistance against a race, the horizontal
resistance will be higher for Maritta (as it remains green longer) than for the
Kennebec. Both forms of resistance coexist, as pathogen does not come alone,
comes as an appropriate mixture of races.
Disease resistance72
Vertical resistance is effective only against the initial inoculum reaching
the field. It effectively screens the races that are not able to attack (a hit or miss
situation). Thus, only those that can survive in the new environment thrive.
Obviously, the second cycle goes with the race that can only thrive at low level
and that’s where horizontal resistance plays the decisive role in retarding the
rate of growth and sporulation. Thus, horizontal resistance is the rule for survival.
Plant has to have horizontal resistance; vertical resistance is like icing on the
cake.
Based on the evolutionary pattern of crops, ranging from annual to perennial,
the resistance pattern varies. The component of vertical resistance available in
the annual crops increases, like in cereals, against the pathogens for which
inoculum comes from outside (like rust in wheat). On the contrary, in perennial
crops, the component of horizontal resistance increases so that the plant can
thrive well over the years and is able to face the odd pathogen attack during its
lifetime. In fact, it is the environment that plays the crucial role in the predisposition
of the plant as well as determines the availability of inoculum in sufficient quantity
that can make inroad in the resistance system of the plant.
Types of resistance
Host resistance falls into two broad categories viz. (i) resistance offered
by the host at the time of the entry of the pathogen and  (ii) subsequent resistance,
that the pathogen encounters during the invasion and establishment in the host
tissue. In the first category, thickness of the cuticle and epidermal layer
(epidermis), cuticular wax, relative abundance of the sclerenchymatous tissue
in the stalk, presence of stomata and other openings (like coverings on root
primordia, suberization of leaf scar, etc.) determine the level of resistance. The
second category comes in the way of the pathogen, retarding its march in the
stalk/internodal tissues, through the relative abundance of vascular tissues in the
internode or hard, lignified sclerenchymatous tissues in the node, which the
pathogen has to overcome for a successful entry and establishment in the cane.
(i) Morphological resistance
The morphological resistance apparently holds some promise for prolonging
the life of any cane genotype. Taking the evolutionary ways of development of
Saccharum barberi and S. sinense, (the two natural hybrids of S. officinarum and
S. spontaneum that flourished in India and China over the millennium) it appears
that nature has favoured that type of plant architecture, which has certain degree
of entry point resistance to red rot pathogen. From the beginning, both barberi
and sinense types are taken as susceptible to red rot on artificial inoculation
(Abbott, 1938; Chona, 1954) but they provided much needed support for sugar
Disease resistance 73
manufacture in India before the advent of man made interspecific hybrids in
1918, starting with Co 205. In spite of the spectacular success of hybrid canes,
these thin indigenous canes commanded considerable area in 1930s and 1940s.
Cultivation of these canes was mostly abandoned in 1950s in favour of hybrid
canes. In a study, Duttamajumder and Misra (unpublished) have shown that
certain pathotypes of C. falcatum, when inoculated breaching the entry point
barrier, produced susceptible to highly susceptible reaction in Khakai (S. sinense);
whereas, the same isolates failed to infect the cane stalk in nodal inoculations
(where entry point resistance was operative). Obviously, this type of entry point
resistance has evolutionary genesis in the prevailing environment of red rot ravaged
subtropical India. Physical resistance is a long lasting one, and forms a significant
part of the host resistance. Daniels and Daniels (1976) were of the opinion that
the noble cane, S. officinarum has indeed originated in Indo-Burma region. It
could not establish itself in the centre of its origin due to red rot, and drifted
towards more congenial environment (south east Asia) where it could flourish
well. On the contrary, the tolerant ones viz., S. barberi and S. sinense types
could adapt in this centre of origin due to their resistance to red rot and these
have adapted to this environment pretty well.
So far, no breeding programme has been targeted in India and elsewhere
to improve this type of resistance (entry point resistance) in cane genotype to
increase their field life. Obviously, current knowledge in this regard is limited to
harness the benefit of this resistance potential. It is usually assumed by different
workers that this type of resistance plays significant role also in sugarcane but so
far, no definitive work has been carried out in sugarcane - C. falcatum system.
(ii) Physiological resistance/biochemical resistance
The physiological resistance is activated at the initiation of infection process
and subsequent development of the pathogen in the host tissue. This is also called
active resistance and directly related with the activity of the host. This type of
resistance, offered by the standing cane against red rot pathogen is well known.
Resistance is also offered by cut canes but with a decrease in efficiency; grades
of resistance go down and level of susceptibility increases by 1-2 units in the 0-9
scale of disease rating. The resistance in host-pathogen combination is often
ascribed by the higher content of polyphenols, total phenols, gum deposition,
PAL and TAL activities and activities of specific compounds like chlorogenic
acid, flavonoids, chitinase, etc.
Several host enzymes namely chitinase,  1-3 glucanase, poly phenol
oxidase (PPO), Phenylalanine ammonia lyase (PAL) and Tyrosine ammonia
lyase (TAL) have been identified as the key enzymes that govern the production
Disease resistance74
of defence related compounds in sugarcane. PAL and TAL are the key enzymes
involved in the biosynthesis of phenolics, phytoalexins and lignins. These enzymes
lead to the formation of activated cinnamic acid, which is the precursor of many
defence related compounds. Madan et al. (1992) were of the opinion that red rot
resistance in sugarcane is due to the high specific activity of PAL and TAL.
Polyphenol oxidase (PPO) quickly oxidises phenols to highly toxic quinines that
arrest the growth of invading organism. The increase in PPO activity is often
taken as an indication of resistance - higher the activity, greater is the degree of
resistance. Similarly, higher activity of peroxidase (important enzyme in the
bio-synthesis of lignin, oxidative degradation of IAA and formation of quinones)
was also taken as the indication of higher degree of resistance.
Several workers have reported that resistance against red rot in sugarcane
may be linked with the amount of phenols produced by a variety. However,
Singh et al. (1976) have shown that there is no positive correlation between the
total phenol content and the degree of resistance against C. falcatum. However,
after infection, the quantity of the total phenol gradually goes down over time in
susceptible genotypes, as against the maintenance of same level in resistant
genotype.
Conflicting reports in literature have marred the explanation of resistance
against C. falcatum in sugarcane. Most of the popular works on biochemical
resistance were undertaken with Co 1148 as the reference variety as it was
backed by its commercial success over the years. Co 1148 remained resistant
for a considerable period against several pathotypes of C. falcatum and eventually
fell prey to it with the development of the matching race Cf 01. With the arrival
of matching race, all the resistance (both morphological and physiological) fell
like a pack of cards. Co1148 could not stand erect for long. This has put a severe
rider on the actual role of the biochemical/physiological parameters for
ascertaining resistance against red rot. However, these biochemicals are essential
for the survival of the plant in the backdrop myriad of microorganisms that it has
to ward off, so their role cannot be undermined. Moreover, no directed breeding
has been made so far, to increase the phenol content or in the augmentation of
biochemical activities leading to the resistant behaviour of a cane genotype.
However, all said and done, it should not be forgotten that Co 1148 has not
lost its resistance to any other race for which it was resistant earlier. The
understanding of resistance in cane is like the observations on elephant by the
blind pupils (in Panchtantra). One is too preoccupied to analyse the things in
hosts’ perspective to find an explanation, leaving pathogen in the wilderness.
That’s why only one-sided story is always available in the literature and it is
Disease resistance 75
happily served for consumption. The pathogens have evolved as thieves; as they
do not remain contained with the plant refuse to lead a saprophytic life. They
have learnt the art of stealing the food from living plant cells. Obviously, for
survival, they have to steal food (as they do not have the ability to manufacture
food), and they cannot compete with the saprobes for the host refuse. Their
survival depends on how best they can overcome or breach the introduced barrier
(resistance) in the host; it is apparent that they have to modify certain armoury in
the quiver to retain the steady flow of food supply by breaching the introduced
resistance. In this context, the pathologists and breeders should develop ways
and means to restrict the generation of highly aggressive strains (similar to
proliferation of nuclear bomb in human society) and develop suitable measures
in arresting their damage potential within a reasonable period of time so that any
catastrophe may be averted.
Of late, involvement of toxins in pathogenesis has been indicated by a
group of workers. The typical red rot symptom (white spot in the earthy red
background with sourly alcoholic smell) could not be reproduced either with the
crude culture filtrate or by the partially purified toxin. The toxin theory in the
pathogenesis involving C. falcatum has little bearing with the actual disease. It is
the damage of conducting tissues due to nodal rotting that leads to the yellowing
of crown and that’s why the yellowing is often confused with the damage due to
termite, rodent or Gurdaspur borer. The metabolites produced by C. falcatum
induce a reserved zone in the cane tissues, thus preventing other microorganisms
to take over. In fact, the internal parenchymatous tissues of cane stalk that act as
the storehouse of sucrose do not offer much resistance except the production of
phenolic compounds in response to infection. The defence reaction is quick due
to the obvious reason. Nature has stored carbohydrate in sugarcane as sugar
(saccharose) for future use, deviating from the ubiquitous polysaccharide starch,
the storage carbohydrate of choice. Guarding simple form of sugar is more difficult
than the complex starch and therefore, it warrants a mechanism of quick defence.
The high activity of defence enzymes in response to any invasion or damage to
the cane clearly suggests their active role. Obviously, C. falcatum has developed
some mechanism to withstand the level of phenolics that hinders the growth of
other microorganisms in cane tissues. Similarly, work is also going on for inducing/
boosting resistance of cane plants through the application of bio-inducers like
Trichoderma, fluorescent Pseudomonads or the application of salicylic acid,
jasmonic acid and other chitinase inducers in plants. This approach may come
handy in future to combat red rot in varieties that are showing certain degrees of
susceptibility to the secondary infection.
Disease resistance76
However, the moot question remains as to whether this type of biochemical
resistance is breedable. Will it be possible to incorporate this type of resistance
in the desired combination (genotype)? So far, such type of breeding or selection
has not taken place or has not received the desired level of success in sugarcane.
It is obvious that the present understanding is inadequate and more in depth study
is needed in host-pathogen recognitions and interactions at the molecular level to
make a new dent in this arena.
Do the size and type of xylem tissues provide resistance?
Atkinson (1938) came out with an observation that variety Co 290, showing
susceptibility to red rot has more number of continuous vessels (vascular bundles)
through the nodes as compared to that of CP 29-116, which was resistant. Abbott
(1938) also supported the view of Atkinson. The work of Varma and Mital (1949)
indicated that the genotypes with more open vascular bundles through the node
provide more susceptibility. They thought that like the Fusarium conidia, conidia
of C. falcatum quickly travel through the vascular bundles and cause infection
higher up in the stalk. Satyavir and his co-workers and others have also expressed
similar opinion in this regard. Unfortunately, these authors failed to appreciate
the fact that in the xylem of the standing cane, C. falcatum does not sporulate at
all. From where will the xylem get conidia for transporting? Even the sporulation
in the infected cane starts, that too in the internodal cavities, when the cane has
already been damaged severely. Moreover, no genotype is susceptible to all the
pathotypes and thus, put a big question mark on the role of running vascular
bundles to the susceptiblity of a genotype. The question has no satisfactory answer.
As indicated earlier, almost all the genotypes, irrespective of their resistance
behaviour at the time of initial evaluation, have fallen prey to red rot later on. Co
1148, a highly resistant genotype of 1970’s, with all its morphological and
biochemical resistance, succumbed to red rot with the development of a matching
pathotype of C. falcatum. The toxin theory or the theory of continuous conducting
vessels helping passage of conidia is based on the mere circumstantial evidence
with no direct relationship.
Breeding for disease resistance in red rot - some reminiscence
In the symposium on red rot in 1954 Sri K.L. Khanna regretted that :
“... The promises made in 1939-40 to keep down the menace of red rot were short-
lived on account of the recurrence of the epidemics. The gradation of varieties with
regard to their susceptibility to red rot did not hold long… With the development of
new virulent races they could not win the confidence of the Industry, which was not
interested in the explanation but the positive results”.
Disease resistance 77
Over the years, the painstaking efforts of breeders and pathologists have
given definite answer to the ‘promise’ in this regard. A varietal saturation with a
large number of resistant genotypes has reduced the red rot incidence to a great
extent and today we have come out of the shadow of epidemic that was looming
large on the Indian sugarcane.
In the same symposium, Sri N. L. Dutt, the then Director of SBI,
Coimbatore made it clear that :
“... Actually no breeding for disease resistance was yet under way at Coimbatore
and only the seedling progenies were being tested against the disease to determine
which parents led to large proportion of disease resistant progenies.”
He cited Dr. Brandes, according to whom “the game was not worth the
candle” as sugarcane is a highly heterozygous polyploid in nature and the inheritance
is not Mendelian. The economic crosses effected were being tested for disease
resistance before final selection.
Inheritance
The breeding for red rot resistance in sugarcane is like ‘catching a black
cat in the dark cellar’. It is more of an art (as well as chance) than the actual
planning (science). Sugarcane is a highly complex polyploid crop plant where
basic chromosome number (x) is 10 (chromosome numbers of commercial
genotypes are usually in the range of 2n=112-128). Sugarcane genome is heavily
loaded with redundant (?) genetic load. Due to this inherent complexity, loss or
gain of some chromosomes (genetic material) may not always reflect in the
phenotype. Moreover, it is on record that different cells of the cane may have
different number of chromosomes, thus forming a mosaic of genetic material.
Inheritance of genes for red rot resistance also drew attention of earlier
workers in USA and Abbott (1938) furnished the information generated in a
preliminary investigation (Table 8.1). It is to be noted that percentage of
susceptible progenies was more than 60% for any cross combinations. In the
backcrossing, (CP 30/23 is the progeny of Co 281 x US 1964) there was some
change in the disease reaction pattern of progenies. In comparison to the parents,
nearly 25% share of MR category improved the resistance rating whereas nearly
same per cent lost its resistance and became susceptible. However, the inheritance
pattern remained inconclusive.
Azab and Chilton (1952, 1959) tried to look into this vexed question of red
rot resistance. Cross combinations viz., RxR, RxS, SxS produced resistance
genotypes in the progeny. The percentage of susceptible progenies in all cross
combinations was above 50% as earlier observed by Abbott (1938). No definite
Disease resistance78
In India, from time-to-time different workers have tried their hand to
elucidate the inheritance pattern for the resistance against red rot but with no
definite results that may improve upon the present understanding. Alexander and
his co-workers from SBI, Coimbatore thought of the introduction of horizontal
resistance against red rot involving different resistant parents through conventional
breeding.  Unfortunately, Alexander and his group met with the same fate – with
no clear-cut inheritance pattern or successful cane genotype fortified with
horizontal resistance. As discussed earlier, sugarcane for all-purposes, behaves
patterns of inheritance emerged out (Table 8.2). The high ploidy level in conjunction
with heterozygosity has made sugarcane an enigma to the geneticists, and even
after 100 years’ of cane breeding very little could be fished out from the virtually
unexplored realms of sugarcane genome. Of late, through EST approach
(expressed sequence tag) an endeavour is underway in different world centres to
unravel at least the expressed portion of the sugarcane genome.
Table 8.1 Behaviour of sugarcane parent and progenies with respect to
red rot resistance
Cross Red rot reaction 
 
of parents 
No. of plants  
tested 
% R %MR %S %HS 
Co 281 x US 1964 R X R 390 4.4 26.2 45.6  23.8 
Co 281 X POJ 2878 R X MR 316 21.5 25.0 37.3  16.1 
POJ 2725 X CP 1161 S X R 105 16.2 14.3 26.7  42.9 
Co 281 X CP 30/23 
(Back cross) 
R X S 101 8.9 15.8 19.8
 55.4 
 (Adapted from Abbott, 1938)
Table 8.2 Behaviour of sugarcane parent and progenies with respect to
red rot resistance
Cross Red rot reaction 
 
of parents 
No. of plants  
tested 
% R %MR %MS %S 
CP 29-116 x CP 36-105 R x R 110 29.9  24.5 25.5 29.1  
CP 36-13 x CP 36-105 R x R 103 10.7  15.5 24.3 49.5  
F 31-962 x CP 36-105 R x R 117 40.2  21.4 18.8 19.6  
  330 24.5  20.6 22.7 32.1  
CP 38-34 x Co 356 S x S 127 22.8  13.4 16.5 47.2  
CP 38-34 X CP 36-138 S x S 106 26.4  16.0 18.9 38.7  
  233 24.5  14.6 17.6 43.3  
CP 34-120 x CP 36-105 S x R 99 33.3  28.3 22.2 16.2  
CP 43-64 x Co 356 R x S 117 23.9  17.9 17.9 40.2  
CP 43-64 x CP 33-372 R x S 113 33.6  15.9 18.6 31.9  
  329 30.0  20.4 19.5 30.1  
 (Adapted from Azab and Chilton, 1959)
Disease resistance 79
like a perennial crop and horizontal resistance is the rule for its survival. The
variety specific pathotype of C. falcatum only indicates the success and failure of
vertical resistance. Breeders rely on this type of resistance to fortify the new
variety (at least as a short term goal) with the hope that it will last much longer in
the field. The boom and bust cycle will continue as a recurrent feature. This
essentially puts a lot of pressure on the breeder to stay a step ahead of the pathogen
in developing resistant cultivars to sustain sugarcane productivity and production.
This situation certainly increases the cost of production of new varieties and the
cost involved in subsequent replacement and adoption by the farmers and millers.
Chona (1956) was of the opinion that with the complex hybrids used as
parents in present-day cane breeding programmes, reaction to red rot is not an
important factor in the selection of desirable parents as the degree of resistance
of the parents has made hardly any difference in the percentage of resistant
seedlings.
Robinson (1962) in the 11th meeting of International Society of Sugarcane
Technologists has put forward the apprehension and plight of the breeder and
policy planner in this regard. He wrote:
“Those responsible for the release of new sugarcane varieties are sometimes faced
with the decision of what to do with the variety which fall, after an acceptable
period of testing, into the category which is neither resistant nor susceptible to a
major disease, the control of which is being attempted.
The variety will of course have other favourable agronomic qualities making its
extension most desirable and in this case, there is a temptation to exploit these
favourable qualities until disease overtakes the variety in question. The conservative
view of discarding a troublesome variety outright to forestall disease spread and
safeguard other valuable varieties is also put forward for consideration. Most
frequently, economic considerations, sometimes justifiable, overrule the latter policy
and a further setback is administered to disease control.”
Most actions with regard to this type of variety must be judged solely in
relation to prevailing circumstances but the wisdom of releasing such a variety
has always appeared doubtful to the writer unless the new cane represents a
highly significant advance on those, which it will replace.
A close look at the data supplied by Alexander (1995) (Table 8.3) and
clubbing the robustum, sinense and barberi with hybrid canes as per the new
findings of Irvine (1999) about the non-tenability of these species reveals an
interesting picture. It became apparent (Table 8.4) that out of 104 old hybrids
(robustum, barberi and sinense) only 5 (4.81%) were R, 17 (16.34%) were MR,
15 (14.42%) were MS, 16 (15.38%)were S and 51 (49.04%) were HS. The
susceptibility picture is also no different in freshly developed ISH hybrids. The
Disease resistance80
corresponding figures are quite similar.  However, there is a definite shift in
resistance reaction in the time tested old hybrids (recognised as barberi and
sinense) that withstood the rigour of red rot in the subtropical India over the
millennium. More of MR type was encountered, with the significant reduction
of MS type. It should be noted that the pattern of high susceptibility was around
50% in both the time tested and the new ISH hybrids. It indicated the role of
natural selection pressure in shifting the population towards more of tolerance in
the intermediate category (MS and MR) rather than imparting any major change
in resistance or susceptible pattern (R and S category). Probably physical
resistance/entry point resistance has played a decisive role in the stabilization of
cane genotypes over the millennium. It is quite likely that due to this entry point
resistance Khakai survived in the subtropical belt, in spite of its susceptibility to
red rot as indicated by Duttamajumder and Misra in their studies (unpublished).
When Khakai was inoculated, some of the C. falcatum isolates that produced HS
reaction on plug method of inoculation failed completely to get an entry in the
cane through nodal method.
In fact, due to this complexity of sugarcane, even today one is not sure
about the genes that are governing the accumulation of sugar, the prized product
for which one grows sugarcane! So is the case with red rot resistance. Indeed
Flor (1942) had shown that a simple inheritance of host resistance genes also
makes the inheritance of the pathogenicity genes simple.  Complexity in any
complimentary system forces the other system to follow suit. A complex
inheritance pattern of host forces the pathogen to adapt a complex system to
match that of the host, so that it remains a step ahead. After all, the pathogen has
to drive nourishment from the host for its own survival. Now the arena is open to
the molecular biologists to make a breakthrough in this direction.
Table 8.3 Red rot reaction in different species of Saccharum
(After Alexander, 1995)
Reaction of red rot
 Group No. of clones  
evaluated R MR  MS S HS 
Saccharum officinarum 208 6 14 6 23  159 
Saccharum robustum 65 2 8 9 9  37 
Saccharum sinense 21 2 6 3 1  9 
Saccharum barberi 18 1 3 3 6  5 
Saccharum spontaneum 315 109  114 26 54 12 
Inter-specific hybrids (ISH)       
For major pathotypes of East- Coastal Zone 144 - 1 7 70  66 
For major pathotypes of North-Central Zone 234 1 14 48  62 109 
For major pathotypes of North-Eastern Zone 238 1 23 51  29 134 
 
Disease resistance 81
Disease resistant varieties
“The horse which wins the derby automatically increases his value as a sire. On a
similar thinking, it is often assumed that the best commercial sugar cane varieties
should prove most valuable as breeding stock, and the majority of breeding programmes
do, in fact, include a high proportion of crosses in which one or both of the parents
are successful commercial varieties. A study of breeding records shows, however,
that commercial excellence, as a sugar producer is little indication of potential
value as a parent. On the contrary, many of the best varieties are bred from parents
unsuitable for commercial use.”
Thus wrote Stevenson (1965) in his famous book ‘Genetics and Breeding
of Sugar Cane’.
The reason for this state of affairs is fairly clear in the light of the modern
knowledge of genetics. It is known that varieties best suited for commercial
cultivation owe their success in a large measure to heterosis, dependent upon
counterpoised genes rather than the parental contributions per se. When such
varieties are used as parents, these gene combinations are upset by chromosome
segregation and recombination at meiosis, and derivatives heterotic to a
comparable magnitude as that of the parents may not occur. In fact, in the past
Table 8.4 Red rot reaction in hybrids and species of Saccharum
Reaction of red rot 
Group No. of clones 
evaluated R MR  MS S HS 
Saccharum officinarum 208 6 14 6 23 159 
Saccharum spontaneum 315 109 114 26 54 12 
Total 523 115 128 32 77 171 
Percentage (species) 100 21.99  24.47 6.12 14.72 32.70 
Old hybrids       
Saccharum robustum 65 2 8 9 9 37 
Saccharum sinense 21 2 6 3 1 9 
Saccharum barberi 18 1 3 3 6 5 
Total 104 5 17 15 16 51 
Percentage (old hybrids) 100 4.81  16.34 14.42 15.38 49.04 
Inter-specific hybrids (ISH)       
For major pathotypes of sub-tropical India  472 2 37 99 91 243 
Percentage (new hybrids) 100 0.42  7.84 20.97 19.28 51.48 
 
Disease resistance82
100 years of cane breeding only two S. spontaneum forms (Java and Coimbatore)
and two S. barberi forms (Chunnee and Kansar) have been effectively used. This
awareness of limited genetic base prompted breeders to broaden the genetic
base to infuse more variability in the commercial hybrids. Thus, to achieve this
goal a large number of ISH clones (inter-specific hybrids) have been developed
from the previously untapped gene pool involving different species of Saccharum
and allied genera.
As mentioned earlier, Dr. Barber emphasised the need of breeding
resistant varieties to check the menace of red rot. Over the years, several
excellent varieties were bred carrying resistance to the prevalent race flora and
were released for general cultivation. However, with the passage of time, most
of these varieties have fallen prey to red rot. The variety Co 213, released in
1920s, occupied a large area in subtropical India but the 1938-39 epidemic pushed
it out of cultivation. Similarly, boom and bust cycle continued and many excellent
sugarcane varieties like Co 312, Co 419, Co 453, Co 997, Co 1148, CoC 671,
CoJ 64, CoS 767, etc. succumbed to the red rot pathogen and were phased out of
cultivation. In sugarcane, the average field life of a variety hardly goes beyond
10 years. Breeding a cane variety takes up almost equal number of years! The
breeders are a bit tensed in this regard. In spite of rigorous testing of clones
during the evaluation, and in pre-release stage, it is on record that some sugarcane
genotypes caught red rot infection even in the very first year of field life or
release for general cultivation !
The pursuit for resistance against red rot in sugarcane is a never-ending
one. The task of breeding sugarcane genotypes with a good degree of resistance
is cumbersome due to the non-availability of high degree of resistance or immunity
in donor parents (Srinivasan, 1965, Stevenson, 1965), occurrence of large number
of races and screening a large population is too arduous to embark upon.
The discussion on disease resistance will not be complete without
deliberation on methods employed to evaluate the resistance/susciptibility of
progenies. A technique suitable to evaluate the progenies satisfactorily for
resistance, irrespective of environmental fluctuation, will be appropriate in this
regard. Moreover, the technique has to be less demanding on resources and
energy and has to be simple enough so that it can be used easily. Like the specific
evaluation methods available for different crop-disease combinations, sugarcane-
red rot system has the ‘plug method’, which is mostly engaged in the evaluation
of resistance against red rot.
Disease resistance 83
INOCULATION TECHNIQUES
Inoculation technique does not make a major dent in the understanding of
any disease, as any technique producing more than 80% disease in favourable
environment will suffice for evaluation. Specific inoculation techniques sometimes
play a very crucial role in identifying the resistant progeny accurately in any
host-pathogen combination. The techniques of inoculation as used for C. falcatum
need some elaboration. These artificial techniques always remained a cause of
disagreement among pathologists and breeders due to variations in the results.
Depending on the part of the plant, age and stage of the crop at the time of
inoculation, inoculation techniques may be grouped into five categories, viz.,
nodal inoculation, internodal, foliage, seedling and soil inoculation.
Nodal method
In nodal inoculation, inoculum is placed on the surface of a node and
C. falcatum has to overcome the nodal resistance (partially or fully) for entry as
well as successful establishment in the cane. This nodal inoculation may be
effected with or without removal of the leaf. (i) When leaf remains intact, node
corresponding to LTM leaf or 1st /2nd node just below the LTM leaf is used for
this purpose. The targeted leaf is pulled a bit to loosen the leaf sheath so that a
gap is formed between stalk and leaf sheath, in which the inoculum is placed.
One millilitre of conidial suspension in distilled water (106 viable conidia/ml) is
placed, usually with a pipette, in the space available between stalk and leaf sheath.
(ii) When the leaf is removed, cotton swab soaked in conidial suspension is placed
on the node and loss of moisture is prevented with coverings. The primary
prerequisite of nodal inoculation is that it should be completed at the onset of
monsoon. IISR nodal method of Singh and Budhraja (1964) and Parafilm method
(Plate 38) of Duttamajumder and Misra (2004) are the two important nodal
methods to reckon with. In the IISR nodal method, 3rd or 4th node from the ground
(basal node) is targeted and after inoculation, a plastic tubing is inserted from the
crown to maintain the humidity. In the Parafilm method, 5th or 6th node from the
top (crown node), usually coincides with LTM leaf or 1st /2nd node just below
(more mature node) is carefully cleaned by removing the leaf. On the freshly
cleaned node, a cotton swab soaked in inoculum is placed around the node, which
is then wrapped with 1½ inch broad Parafilm strip to avoid any moisture loss.
The Parafilm method scores over the other nodal methods by fixing the growth
status (tissue condition) irrespective of the age or maturity of cane and by providing
adequate moisture for conidial germination and successful infection. The Parafilm
covering on inoculum impregnated cotton swab around the node helps to prevent
moisture loss. Due to the young tissue, the delineation of susceptibility is very
Disease resistance84
fast, and any cane genotype may be scored for susceptibility in 10-15 days of
inoculation, as compared to 60 days, in all other inoculation methods. Moreover,
the topple down effect of inoculated canes of susceptible genotypes from the
node of inoculation makes the identification of susceptibility very easy even by a
layman.
Internodal method
The most popular method of inoculation, even today, is the much maligned
‘plug method’. Incidentally Butler and Khan (1913) introduced this method of
inoculation. In this method, a hole is made in the stalk (internode), inoculum is
placed inside the hole and the opening is sealed with modelling clay. Usually
2nd or 3rd internode above the ground (basal node) is taken for inoculation (to avoid
any contamination due to stagnation of water during the rains) as the inoculation
is mostly carried out in August-September. This method is too harsh and does not
account for any entry point resistance to the pathogen. However, grading of
genotypes, assessed through this method, is more consistent. For making hole in
the stalk a plunger-type inoculator was developed by Menon and Singh (1960),
which became popular and is popularly known as IISR inoculator (Plate 39 b). In
Haryana, Virk introduced modified hypodermic syringe for this purpose. To
reduce the drudgery of using IISR inoculator, Duttamajumder and Dwivedi (1995)
introduced a portable (rechargeable battery operated) hand drill (Plate 39 c) to
make a hole in the cane. With the availability of different size bits for making
hole, inoculation in thin spontaneum canes like SES 594 or hard canes like
CoLk 8002 became easy and damage or cracking of the cane internode was
reduced to the bare minimum.
Plug method remained the method of choice. Accordingly, different
workers have tried to improve the efficacy of this method. Due to the problems
of inadequate sporulation in different strains/pathotypes of C. falcatum,
homogenized slurry of mycelial growth along with the media (OMA) was often
used as inoculum. Thus, there was no uniformity in the inoculum. Prakasham
and his group from Anakapalle tried to standardize the inoculum with definite
quantity of conidia sans any mycelium or extraneous material. They used different
concentration of spore load and found that a concentration of 106 conidia/ml is
adequate for evaluating resistance of cane genotypes against red rot (Table 8.9).
The use of a pure conidial suspension has been now adopted as a standard practice.
In spite of the standardized inoculum load of 106 conidia/ml, results often fluctuate.
To avoid such fluctuations, an inoculation and evaluation of a minimum 50 canes
is recommended in the plug method. Duttamajumder and Misra (unpublished)
tried to eleucidate the nature of variation that necessitated inoculation and evaluation
of at least 50 canes to arrive at the resistance of a cane genotype. They inoculated
Disease resistance 85
1000 canes of Co 1148 with Cf 01 at one go, so that variations in other parameters
are kept at bare minimum. After 60 days of inoculation they observed
(Table 8.5) that 85 per cent canes were showing HS reaction, 4 per cent were
showing S reaction and 4 per cent were classified in MS category. It came to
light that in 5 per cent cane C. falcatum could not made any significant progress
in producing disease and were classified as MR type and in rest 2 per cent infection
was restricted to the inoculated internode and was classified as R type. However,
out of these 7 per cent cane showing resistant behaviour also showed the sign of
some secondary invaders. These secondary invaders probably checked the
proliferation of C. falcatum in the cane tissue.
Table 8.5 Variation of  disease reaction in plug method (1000 cane
inoculation, in Co 1148 and Cf 01 combination)
 Disease reaction 
 HS S MS MR R 
Per cent cane 85 4 4 5 2 
 
Chona (1954) who popularised this method commented that the ‘plug method’
though harsh will continue, so long as any other effective method of testing of the
cane genotypes is developed. Though breaching of morphological resistance is
the major drawback, it hardly plays a significant role, as the physiological
resistance is considered most important to the cane to fight against red rot. An
active involvement of an intact and live host determines the resistance/
susceptibility. Currently AICRP(S) follows two methods of inoculation viz., plug
and nodal simultaneously to evaluate resistance of cane genotypes. However,
the result of plug method still rules the roost for the recommendation of a variety
for general cultivation.
Foliage inoculation
Foliage inoculation was developed by Srinivasan (1962a) in which seedlings
of six weeks age were sprayed with conidial suspension in high relative humidity
(RH) and favourable temperature. This inoculation killed majority of the seedlings
leaving a very few for selection. Similar observation was also made by
Duttamajumder (unpublished) by placing C. falcatum inoculum grown on Sorghum
seed and scattered in the seedling bed at the age of one month. Though it appeared
good in reducing high initial population to a manageable level, chance of getting
desired varietal material did not improve. Thus, it put a serious question on the
killing of seedlings at a very early stage of their life. In fact, Prasadarao (1985)
commented that the seedling method of screening was illogical, and he even
titled the paper as “Throwing out the babies with bath water” to indicate its fallacy.
Singh et al. (1978) modified this method by increasing the age of seedlings and
Disease resistance86
carried out inoculation in 5-6 months old seedlings in field condition (coinciding
with monsoon rains in July-August). Essentially, this inoculation also reduced
the number of cane genotypes for evaluation by the breeders and eventually, all
the selected genotypes were tested again using plug method. However, it did not
improve the chance of getting the desired varietal material. This method also
could not gain support, as leaf-resistance and stalk-resistance do not corroborate.
Cut cane technique
The controlled condition testing (CCT) was developed and used by the
workers at SBI, Coimbatore in 1992. The limitation of field screening imposed
by the germplasm collection at Coimbatore forced them to search for an alternative
method of screening that can be carried out in the glass house. In search of a
suitable method, this CCT method was developed.  It is essentially a cut cane
method. Canes of 6-8 months age are cut from field and brought to the glasshouse.
These cut canes are placed in poly-bags filled with pot mixture for rooting.
Inoculation is carried out using nodal method and inoculated cut canes were kept
under controlled temperature and humidity (in the glasshouse). A good correlation
with field testing was claimed. Being a cut cane method, the resistance is not
always comparable with that of field-testing, as the degree of susceptibility
increases by one to two units (0-9 scale) in cut canes.
Grading of resistance against C. falcatum
Srinivasan and Bhat (1961) advanced the red rot resistance breeding
significantly. They rationalised the grading system for the evaluation of red rot
resistance following the plug method of inoculation (Table 8.6). During the
Platinum Jubilee Celebration of SBI, Coimbatore in his reminiscences,
N. R. Bhat (1987) wrote :
“On studying the technique employed by the pathologists for testing canes for red rot
reaction, it appeared to be unsatisfactory as results of tests were often inconsistent.
The inoculum used was a mixture of isolates collected from diseased canes. The
criterion used for judging grades of susceptibility was only length. At my instance,
both these were changed. Firstly, a pure culture of “D” strain, the most virulent
available at that time, was used for inoculation. Secondly, in addition to lesion-
length, observations were recorded also on striking symptoms developing in diseased
canes of various grades of susceptibility. The study of the data collected on the
revised basis revealed that, lesion-width, development of white spots on lesions, and
drying of cane tops served as a better guide in judging the reaction. The results were
so consistent and convincing that they could be definitely used in formulating a
reliable key for grading red rot reaction as indicating resistance, tolerance and
susceptibility.”
Srinivasan and Bhat (1961) came out with a system of grading sugarcane
genotypes (Table 8.6) based on lesion length (node transgressed), lesion width,
Disease resistance 87
condition of top and the presence of white spots. They advanced the system from
lesion length to well defined criteria with their respective weightages for evaluating
resistance. The success of this system is judged by its popularity. Sugarcane
pathologists engaged in red rot research use this scale (modified) and it has been
adopted as the key system of grading for red rot evaluation (Table 8.7) in All
India Co-ordinated Research Project (Sugarcane).
Table 8.6. Suggested key for resistance categories by Srinivasan & Bhat,
1961
(After Srinivasan and Bhat, 1961)
Explanation :
Lesion width : 0 = Lesion confined to inoculated internode, 1 = Lesion sharply
restricted in width, 2 = Lesion tending to spread laterally
White spot : 0 = Absent, 1 = Circumscribed, 2 = Prominent
No. of nodes crossed : 0 = 0, one = 1, two to four = 2, more than four = 2
Condition of top : 0 = Green, 1 = Yellow or dry
Disease 
reaction 
Characteristics 
Highly  
resistant (HR) 
Tops green; lesion confined to inoculated internode. Serial s pots and 
pith lesions absent. 
Resistant (R) Tops green; lesion crossing one node and tending to remain r estricted 
in width with a sharp, dark red margin (1); white spots absent (0). 
Serial spots and pith lesions absent. 
Moderately 
resistant (MR) 
Tops green; lesion crossing one node and tending to remain r estricted 
in width with white spots circumscribed. Serial spots and pith lesions, 
when present, non- progressive; nodal necrosis, when present, not 
tending to taper. 
Moderately 
Susceptible (S)
 
Tops green; lesion crossing more than one node and tending to sp read 
laterally to a grea ter or lesser extent (2); white spots circumscribed, or 
prominent (2) and typically running in a transverse direction. Ser ial 
spots and pith lesions, when present, progressive; rarely, nod al 
transgression nil, but serial spots and/or pith lesions prog ressive; nodal 
necrosis, when present, not tending to taper. 
Highly 
susceptible 
(HS) 
Tops yellow or dry. (Lesion crossing a few nodes or more o ften the 
greater part or the entire cane and covering the greater p art of the entire 
width of cane; white spots prominent, transverse. Serial sp ots and pith 
lesions, when present , progressive, but often not distinguishable due to 
coalescence of lesions; nodal necrosis, when present, covering entir e 
node; cavities present, in the growth ring of certain varieties.) 
 
Observations on lesion width, nodal transgression and white spots are based on
the symptoms/reactions expressed in the internode above the inoculated internode.
The top condition is either yellow or green, white spot may be absent or
present. When present it may be restricted in development and may be spreading.
Disease resistance88
The spread of infection up to three nodes above the inoculated internode is counted
for grading. Similarly, spread of the disease in the cane i.e, maximum width of
the lesion in the internodes above the inoculated internode for which nodal
transgression was recorded is taken into account (Anon., 1973-2005).
Prasadarao and his group from Anakapalle further advanced the grading
system of Srinivasan and Bhat (1961). They delimited lesion width as 1/3rd, 2/3rd
and >2/3rd and assigned 1, 2, 3 points, respectively. Similarly, nodal transgression
was delimited to three nodes and assigned one point for each node crossed. Thus,
they implemented the 0-9 scale. Duttamajumder and Singh (1999) have modified
the grading system of Srinivasan and Bhat (1961) to the effect that the nodal
rotting was taken as the measure of spread.
Prasadarao and coworkers also proposed a new system of grading based
on discriminant function. Prasadarao et al. (1978) argued that maximum
weightage should be given to white spots as this symptom invariably appears in
the susceptible genotypes on inoculation with red rot pathogen. On this basis,
they developed an equation/discriminant function.
Z = 3.5X 1+ 36.7X 2+X3
X1 = Lesion width; X2 = Occurrence and nature of white spots; X3 =No.
of nodes penetrated
If Z > 89 it is taken as susceptible, a value between 42 and 89 places it in
the intermediate category and Z < 42 is taken as resistant.
Scoring
X1 Lesion width < 1/3rd of internode = 1
Lesion width > 1/3rd of internode = 2
X2 White spot absent = 1
White spots surround by necrotic ground tissue of dark colour = 2
White spots large and running in a transverse direction = 3
X 3 The no. of nodes trangressed by the pathogen.
Table 8.7. Modified grading system of Srinivasan and Bhat (1961), as accepted
by AICRP (Sugarcane)**
1. Condition of top : 0  (green), 1(yellow, dry)
2. Presence of white spot : 0 (absent), 1 (restricted) , 2 (enlarging)
3. Nodal transgression : 0 (restricted to inoculated i nternode), 1 (one node crossed),
2 (two nodes crossed), 3 (three or more nodes crossed)
4. Lesion width : 0 (absent), up to 1/3 rd (1), up to 2/3rd (2), >2/3rd  (3).
** (0-2.0 =R,  2.1-4.0=MR,  4.1-6.0=MS, 6.1-8.0=S, >8=HS)
(Minimum number of canes =50)
Disease resistance 89
Table 8.8. Grading system for evaluation of cane inoculated with the plug
method for red rot resistance
Explanation:
1. Condition of top : 0 (green), 1 (yellow, dry)
2. Presence of white spot : 0 (absent), 1 (restricted),  2 (enlarging)
3. Nodal transgression : Average of number of node crossed ab ove the inoculation point
(0, 1, 2, 3) x lesion width in the internode above the inoculated
internode (0, 1, 2, 3) : Here the two characters are clubbed into one
to give an area concept i.e. % of area/tissue affected.
Node transgressed X Lesion width
       3
4. Nodal necrosis : 0 (absent), up to 25% (1), up to 50% (2), >50% (3):
This character is added in this method of screening.
Observations on lesion width (LW) and nodal necrosis (NN) are
based on the symptoms/reactions expressed in the node and internode
just above the inoculated internode.
(After Duttamajumder and Singh,1999)
** (0-2.0 = R,  2.1-4.0 = MR,  4.1-6.0 = MS, 6.1-8. 0 = S, >8 = HS)
(Minimum number of canes = 20)
Criteria for grading Score (0-9 scale) ** 
1)  Condition of the top Green  
(0) 
Yellow/dry 
(1) 
  
2)  White spot Nil 
(0) 
Restricted 
(1) 
Enlarging 
(2) 
 
3)  Nodal transgression 
     (Average of three internode above
 
      the inoculated internode) 
Nil 
(0) 
Up to 25% area 
(1) 
Up to 50% area 
(2) 
>50% area 
(3) 
4)  Nodal necrosis 
     (Node just above the inoculated  
     internode) 
Nil 
(0) 
Up to 25% area
 
(1) 
Up to 50% area 
(2) 
>50% area 
(3) 
 
This system mainly considers white spots, giving it a weightage of 36.7
with no weightage to the nodal transgression and only 3.5 to lesion width. White
spots appear only in susceptible genotypes. Obviously, it becomes a scale to test
the susceptibility, not the test of resistance, as evidenced by its skewed nature to
white spots. In any disease resistance breeding programme, one is obviously
interested in the degree of resistance, not the degree of susceptibility.
Physical barriers are restricted to the entry of the pathogen to the host
tissues only, the actual establishment of the pathogen in the cane is determined
by the physiological behaviour of the internal tissues. Obviously, the pathogen
has to overcome the physiological barrier(s) at the first instance to be successful
in leading a parasitic life. Moreover, after the entry into the cane through the
nodal region pathogen faces the hostile environment of sclerenchymatous tissues
Disease resistance90
of the node. Until and unless the pathogen is able to overcome this very hardy
tissue, it stands no chance to go down the most favoured parenchymatous tissue
of the internode and to cause any significant damage to the cane. Thus, the nodal
rotting (necrosis) of the cane is the most important criterion on which testing/
evaluation of resistance should be based. Taking nodal rotting as the main criterion,
one can explain and minimise the discrepancies arising out of different inoculation
techniques, especially the plug and nodal methods. To overcome this dual problem,
a grading system within the main frame of Srinivasan and Bhat (1961), was
proposed by Duttamajumder and Singh (1999) to take out much of the harshness
of the plug method and to provide more realistic grading of the sugarcane genotypes
(Table 8.8). In this modified system, horizontal spread of the disease within the
cane should be taken on node, not in the internode as nodal rotting is characteristic
of red rot, as described earlier. (Top condition =1, White spot = 2, vertical
spread =3, horizontal spread at node (nodal rotting) =3). The degree of nodal
rotting when the cane was subjected to plug method of inoculation was found to
be the indicator of field resistance. This grading system helps to take out much of
the harshness of plug method in the sense that many MS grade genotype improve
their performance on the count of resistance, which is more realistic.
Inoculum load
It is apparent that even in the most congenial environment of the host tissue
certain amount of inoculum load is necessary to initiate successful infection.
Theoretically, one conidium can initiate successful infection whereas, in practical
terms even placement of 6000 conidia/ml could only produce 8.7% HS category
whereas, 6 million conidia (1000 times of 6000) produced 90.7% HS symptom in
Co 419 (Table 8.9). It is also to be noted that genotypes differ in this requirement
of inoculum load. In case of Co 997 an inoculum load of 6000 conidia successfully
produced 74.2% HS symptoms. However, infiltration of setts with different
number of conidia gave altogether different picture. Infiltration of conidia through
cut ends of two-bud setts revealed that 1 million conidia (106), 0.1 million (105)
registered complete failure of germination
Table 8.9 Relative concentration of  spores in the inoculum used in plug
method and development of disease
(Source: 75 years’ research at Anakapalle)
Spore concentration Per cent cane showing HS category (top drying) 
 Variety 
 Co 419 Co 997 
6x106 90.7 100.0 
6x105 89.8 100.0 
6x104 29.1    88.3 
6x103   8.7    74.2 
 
Epidemiology 91
9
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Life cycle and disease cycle
Manifestation of red rot varies depending on the nature of infection, time
of the season and the prevailing environment. If sufficient inoculum is present in/
on the sett in active form and if adequate moisture is available, it causes both
pre- and post-emergence mortality of the sprouts during April-May in the
subtropical region. With the advent of pre-monsoon showers, symptoms of the
disease start appearing, and with the onset of the monsoon when the weather is
most suitable, full manifestation of the disease takes place. Later on, infected
plants turn yellow and finally dry up. At the grand growth phase, when sufficient
stalk and sugar have formed, typical stalk rot phase (red rot phase) appears. Red
rot is not easily identified from the external appearance of the cane unless it has
caused irreparable damage by rotting the internal tissues. In such cases, the rind
loses its natural bright colour, turns violet or displays dark reddish tinge, and
becomes dull in appearance. The affected plants appear sick; usually yellowing
of the 3rd or 4th leaf, these being the prominent leaves of the crown, draw the
attention of the observer from a distance (The yellowing may start from any leaf
of the crown - there is no hard and fast rule). Yellowing of leaf starts from the tip
and proceeds down along the leaf margin. C. falcatum proliferates within the
cane stalk happily, and usually comes out through the root primordia for secondary
spread when sufficient rotting of the internal tissues has taken place.  The fungus
totally transforms the root primordia into black acervuli bearing abundant conidia
(the black colour is due to the dark setae). At this stage, if the cane is split open
longitudinally, typical symptoms of red rot, viz., reddening of the internal tissues
with interrupted red and white patches (white spots) in the affected internodes,
rotten or damaged node, and the presence of typical sourly alcoholic smell may
Epidemiology92
(  I n f e c t e d  S e t t  )
S e t t  a n d  s e t t l i n g  
m o r t a l i t y
A p p e a r a n c e  o f  
s p i n d l e  i n f e c t i o n  a n d  
s p r e a d
M i d  r i b  i n f e c t i o n  , l a m i n a r  
i n f e c t i o n , p e r f e c t  s t a g e , 
s t a l k  i n f e c t i o n
D e a t h  o f  c a n e  p l a n t s  a n d  
s p o r u l a t i o n  o n  s t a l k
I n c i p i e n t  i n f e c t i o n
I n f e c t e d  c a n e
S u r v i v a l  i n   r a t o o n , t r a s h , 
i n f e c t e d  s t a l k
C h a n c e s  o f  s o i l  
s u r v i v a l
H a p p y  d a y s
B a d  d a y s
be observed (Butler, 1906; Abbott, 1938; Edgerton, 1959; Singh and Singh, 1989;
Agnihotri, 1990). At the final stage of the disease, interior of the stalk darkens
and the tissues shrink, leaving a cavity which may be filled with the mycelium,
conidia, setae, appressoria, etc. Gradually the affected cane looses moisture
and dries up. On the surface of the cane rind, numerous acervuli laden with
conidia are formed; these help in the dissemination of the pathogen (Singh and
Singh, 1989; Agnihotri, 1990; Duttamajumder, 2002).
The pathogen is a transient visitor of soil and remains viable as long as the
infected debris lie undecomposed in the soil (Singh et al., 1977; Agnihotri et al.,
1979). Due to its high sensitivity to microbial antagonism, C. falcatum cannot
withstand the stiff competition with the saprophytes in soil (Butler, 1906; Chona
and Nariani, 1952). The role of soil in the epidemiology of red rot is not apparent,
as sugarcane is available round the year. Rather, it is the environment that
modulates the growth of the pathogen, both in terms of incidence and intensity of
the disease. As far as the need of survival goes, C. falcatum does not face any
situation of non-availability of host in nature, like most of the pathogens of perennial
crops. This eventually does not put any pressure on C. falcatum to be competitive
in the soil environment. Thus, like most of the transient visitors, it also survives
in the soil as long as the infected debris is not fully captured by the soil microflora
for degradation. Moreover, the inoculum present in the debris is always
Fig. 9.1. Life cycle and disease cycle of C. falcatum
Epidemiology 93
surrounded (as an outer layer) by the antagonistic microflora which are actively
involved in the decomposition of the debris, and thus, do not leave any room for
C. falcatum to come out and proliferate. Experiments with infected debris by
various workers have indicated only limited success of infection from debris and
that too when the debris is directly in contact with the cane.
Host-pathogen and environment: the trio of epidemiology and management
Considering the limited role of soil as the reservoir of inoculum, due to
stiff microbial antagonism, the role of host becomes far more important in the
survival of the pathogen. Obviously, C. falcatum has tried to evolve with the host
and often behaves like a semi-obligate parasite. In fact, the leaf form (prevalent
on mid-rib and leaf lamina) does not cause any noticeable harm in the overall
productivity of the cane, nor does it threaten the life of individual cane. Obviously,
the major factors that determine the disease appearance and its progress are the
environmental factors like relative humidity (RH), rainfall, sunshine hours, dew,
temperature, wind, etc. It has been noticed by various workers that the linear
spread of red rot in the cane stalk gradually gets restricted with the fall in ambient
temperature and the success of infection dwindles during the peak winter, even
with the plug method of inoculation. It is obvious that the major role is played by
the environmental factors that modulate the infection like any other perennial
crop.
In certain period of the year (season) when maximum air temperature lies
between 30-350C and minimum air temperature is around 250C, C. falcatum
grows happily and damages the cane rapidly. (Fig. 9.2-9.5). In spite of the crucial
role of pathogen-environment combination in the epidemiology of this disease,
there is a big gap in the present understanding. A comprehensive study is warranted
in this direction. Similarly, the role played by the host in the same environmental
fluctuations needs critical evaluation from the standpoint of epidemiology and
spread of the pathogen. Still it is not clear how red rot suddenly flares up from
nowhere affecting the so-called resistant varieties in a large area. Does the
pathogen spread with the seed cane surreptitiously? How does it increases its
population for the big day or the type of environment needed to activate the pathogen
from the slumber and engineer an epidemic – there are many such questions that
need a satisfactory answer.
Sugarcane, being available round the year, the pathogen gets easy access
to the major component of host-pathogen-environment system for meeting its
food requirement. Therefore, it is left to the vagaries of the environment to
modulate the disease incidence and intensity. However, the dominant role is
played by the resistance of the host and virulence of the pathogen. Time and
again, it has been noticed that red rot is quite variety specific, i.e., only a specific
Epidemiology94
 
Fig. 9.3.  Weather parameters at IISR farm, from July to October 1995
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45 Maximum Minimum
Temperature (°C)
1 Jul
16 Jul
31 Jul
15 Aug
30 Aug
14 Sep
29 Sep
14 Oct
29 Oct
Fig. 9.2.  Weather parameters at IISR farm, Lucknow- year 1995
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
1 Jan
31 Jan
2 Mar
1 Apr
1 May
31 May
30 Jun
30 Jul
29 Aug
28 Sep
28 Oct
27 Nov
27 Dec
Maximum temp. Minimum temp.
Temperature (°C)
Epidemiology 95
 
Fig. 9.4.  Weather parameters at  IISR farm, Lucknow - year 1999
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Maximum Minimum
Temperature (°C)
1 Jan
1 Feb
1 Mar
1 Apr
1 May
1 Jun
1 Jul
1 Aug
1 Sep
1 Oct
1 Nov
1 Dec
Fig. 9.5.  Weather parameters at IISR farm from July to October 1999
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Maximum Minimum
Temperature (°C)
1 Jul
8 Jul
15 Jul
22 Jul
29 Jul
5 Aug
12 Aug
19 Aug
26 Aug
2 Sep
9 Sep
16 Sep
23 Sep
30 Sep
7 Oct
14 Oct
21 Oct
28 Oct
Epidemiology96
variety is affected at any given point of time. Rest of the varieties usually remain
free from disease in commercial cultivation. This indirectly helped to formulate
deployment strategy of cane varieties as well as reducing the share of acreage
for any given variety so that a reasonable cane supply to the sugar mill was
ensured even in a bad year.
Varietal resistance against the prevalent races/ pathotypes in a specific
geographical area is the primary prerequisite to raise a healthy crop. Secondly,
sugarcane is commercially propagated through stem cuttings called “setts”; these
setts should be free from red rot infection to prevent the ingress of the initial
inoculum through the planting material. Thirdly, fields having immediate history
of red rot should be avoided for cane planting. Although the soil inoculum does
not pose any immediate threat to the crop, it surely produces contaminated planting
material, which shows the effect later.
Spread of the pathogen in the crop
Sett, the planting material, remains the focal point of carrying infection to
the field as the primary inoculum. The latent infections are the key infections
that defy detection at any level, reach the field with sett, and express later on. If
the planting material is heavily infected, it rarely germinates, as C. falcatum
damages the nodes badly, which in turn kills the bud and root primordia. The
data of an experiment conducted in 1950’s by Rafay and Singh (1959) are given in
Table 9.1 to highlight the situation. Maximum number of diseased cane was
developed from the apparently healthy cane (cane with no reddening at the cut
ends). A recent observation by the author on the outbreak of red rot in CoJ 82 in
Barabanki (U.P.) has reinforced the observations of earlier worker on two counts
Table 9.1 Appearance of disease in the crop planted with apparently
healthy, partially diseased and diseased setts
(Adapted from Rafay and Singh, 1959, work carried out at Pusa, Bihar on Co 299)
Buds 
Condition of setts 
(two bud) 
Year
 
Planted Germinated Germination 
(%) 
No. of 
millable 
canes 
No. of 
diseased 
cane 
Per cent 
diseased 
I 40 4 10 6 3 50 Both end diseased 
II 40 7 18 10 7 70 
I 40 19 48 21 3 14 One end diseased 
II 40 17 43 24 9 38 
I 40 28 70 36 12 33 Apparently healthy  
from diseased plot 
(incipient infection) 
II 40 25 63 39 6 15 
I 40 30 75 36 - - Control (from healthy 
plot) II 40 29 73 44 - - 
 
Epidemiology 97
viz., (i) the importance of seed-borne infection (in the introduction of inoculum
from other region as well as its effectiveness in spreading the disease), and
(ii) early appearance as well as flare up of the disease in the congenial
microclimate. On tracing the source of the seed-cane, about 10-12 per cent
incidence of red rot was noticed in the plots contributed by the seed-cane (now a
ratoon crop) in August. The seed cane was initially brought from western Uttar
Pradesh and was multiplied for a year. From this multiplication plot, seed-cane
was distributed to five farmers spanning a distance of more than 50 kilometres.
In the farm of one progressive farmer the disease flared up and the entire crop
was affected. On the other hand, in fields of rest of the four farmers, disease
incidence hardly exceeded 10-20 per cent.  Lack of adequate irrigation was noticed
in three locations and incidence of termite was observed in the other. In the
termite affected crop the disease incidence was minimum (around 10 per cent).
It was apparent that the crop that got better irrigation and agronomic management
in the early phase of growth favoured the secondary spread of the disease. It may
not be out of place to put on record the experience that the author has gained from
various cane disease surveys conducted in the past 22 years. The red rot was
frequently noticed in the fields of poor farmers who did not have enough resources
for seed replacement and continued to grow the old susceptible varieties that had
long been denotified by the State. Similarly, red rot was also noticed in the fields
of progressive farmers who took good care of the crop and introduced different
cane genotypes from several locations for evaluation. Red rot is less common in
the fields of average farmers who are intermediate between these extremes.
In order to assess the significance of secondary infection, Mr. Rafay laid
out an experiment in March 1954 by planting setts from red rot affected canes of
Co 453 in a row (as infector row). The two adjoining rows had the healthy setts
of Co 453. In the first week of July 1954, three clumps in the infector row had the
spindles affected with red rot. In September, stalk infection was noticed in both
the diseased and adjoining healthy rows. Until harvest, primary infection (directly
developed from infected sett) was observed in 23 cases and secondary infection
(where such direct connection was not apparent) was noticed in 198 stalks (Anon.
1953-2005). Similar observations have been made by later workers with different
variety-pathotype combinations in quite different geographic locations.  In a similar
experiment, Duttamajumder and Misra (unpublished) observed that the inoculum
developed as a result of spindle infection accounted for majority of the secondary
spread. Such a spread usually covered a distance of 1.50-1.80 metres from the
cane with spindle infection. It will not be out of place to mention that the young
shoots bearing spindle infection die out quickly, and these often become the
favourite food of Trichoderma, basidiomyceteous fungi, bacteria and termite.
Epidemiology98
Mr. Rafay also monitored the mid-rib lesions during this period. The mid-
rib infection was noticed in June as minute dots on the upper side of the mid-rib
of leaves. From July to October, the lesions increased and developed a straw
coloured central region with innumerable dark dots consisting of acervuli of
C. falcatum. They were formed on the mid-ribs of almost all the 305 varieties
used in the experiment. Cultures taken from leaves of all varieties having red rot
lesions on the mid-rib produced ‘dark type’ cultures except Co 956 and Co 995,
which produced the ‘light type’ (probably spindle infection was taken as mid-rib
infection). It was significant that no stalk infection was recorded in any variety
despite the incidence of red rot lesions in leaves of a large number of varieties.
The two varieties, i.e., Co 956 and Co 995 which yielded light type isolate also
had stalk infection (Anon. 1953-2005).
Limited information is available on the role of environmental factors aiding
the spread of the red rot pathogen in the crop and its role in the development of an
epidemic. In 1970’s, Sreeramulu (1973) presented a lone paper on sugarcane
disease epidemiology regarding the dynamics of spread of conidia. He wrote
that :
“... conidia of Colletotrichum falcatum were not caught in appreciable numbers in
the Hirst trap (located at heights both within and above the crop) on most days even
when the occurrence of innumerable number of profusely sporulating acervuli were
present. Very few conidia were caught on the slides, only on few days, and an
analysis of these catches indicated the possibility of the existence of a ‘nocturnal
pattern’ in the daily rhythm with the maximum about at 8 PM”.
The ‘nil catch’ records on most of the days imply that there is no conidial
presence of the C. falcatum in the air over the sugarcane field. On the contrary,
Singh and Lal (1996) thought that the spread of the conidia and dried acervuli
freely took place in the winter months, and played a significant role in the
epidemiology of the disease as numerous acervuli appeared on the surface of
dried red rot affected canes during the winter months. These authors have failed
to appreciate the fact that the conditions favourable to cause infection are not
available during the winter months, and lying on the soil surface for the favourable
weather to come is not the cup of tea for C. falcatum. Even if the dry conidial
matrix spreads in the crop canopy, it does not pose any immediate threat to infect
the cane crop, even to the newly emerging shoots.
Satyavir and co-workers worked on some aspects of the disease development
in relation to weather parameters in Haryana. They have reported a minimum
temperature of 25.5 to 26.60C and an evening relative humidity (RH) of >60 per
cent as the two important parameters in disease development. Initiation of infection
was negatively correlated with maximum temperature (r= -0.65 to -0.81) and
Epidemiology 99
morning RH; rainfall had a direct bearing on the successful initiation of infection.
Similarly, the rainfall was found mainly responsible for the secondary spread of
the pathogen.
The most damaging phase of the crop occurs only during the late monsoon,
emphasising the importance of rain, cloudy weather, moderate temperature,
etc. in the development and spread of the disease. A look at the temperature of
any particular year reveals that the period of July-August-September, is the critical
three months period when red rot has its field day, when the gap between
maximum and minimum temperature is narrow, and relative humidity (RH)
for greater part of the day remains 80% or above in most of the period
(Fig. 9.2-9.5).
Again, during these three months, a cloud cover for a considerable period
provides needed ambience in the microclimate; a common feature in the
subtropical India. Red rot is a nagging problem in eastern Uttar Pradesh and
Bihar where flooding or waterlogging is common. The accentuated susceptibility
of cane plant is due to the predisposition in the above situation. Waterlogging
forces the production of aerial roots, and as early as 1906, Butler had pointed out
that these emerging roots act as the conduit and catch the infection of C. falcatum
easily.
Irrigation and rain/flood water play a very important role in the dissemination
of the red rot pathogen. Rain splash on the spore mass developed on spindle
leaves, mid-rib and the nodal region including rind takes the aerial route and
spreads with micro-droplets of water carrying conidia (Duttamajumder, 2002).
The excess water also runs down taking the spores in its course and reach the
ground. At this time, any running water helps the spread of the spores from one
field to the other. Late in the season, enormous sporulation also appears on the
surface of dead plants, and if weather favours dispersal of this inoculum, it often
initiates infection which mostly becomes latent. Latency is the hallmark of the
genus Colletotrichum. Due to this reason, in autumn planting (October), there is
every chance that red rot infected cane (latent infection) will be planted, as there
is no chance of detecting the latent infections. In fact, it has been proved beyond
doubt by Dr. Kishan Singh and co-workers that in red rot prone area, October
planting favours more incidence of the disease in comparison to the spring planting
(February-March). Due to this reason, the avoidance of autumn planting is often
recommended in the red rot prone areas.
Collateral/Alternative hosts
Collateral hosts play a significant role in the epidemiology of any disease
and in many cases these act as the stepping-stone for the pathogen. Sorghum,
whether cultivated or wild, readily supports the growth of Colletotrichum falcatum.
Epidemiology100
Moreover, Sorghum halepense, a common weed is often encountered in the cane
fields and the adjoining area. Different species of Saccharum also harbour the
pathogen. Saccharum spontaneum, though serves as the resistant donor for red
rot resistance, also harbours leaf infection of red rot pathogen in good number.
Similarly, C. falcatum can also survive on other grasses like Leptochloa,
Miscanthus, etc., and thus maintains the innoculum in active form. Red rot
inoculum from these grasses reaches the sugarcane crop through wind, wind-
borne rain, splattering rain-drops, floodwater and running water and may initiate
infection in the crop. However, these sources remain more cosmetic in
contribution of inoculum and rarely play any significant role in this regard.
Soil survival
As mentioned earlier, Butler tried to study the development of infection of
the cane through the soil route. He could not produce an infection when inoculum
was placed in soil. C. falcatum could not last long in the moist soil environment.
Before the epidemic of 1938-39, the role played by the soil in assisting C. falcatum
for perpetuation and causing new infection was not taken seriously.  Dr. Chona
was of the opinion that in some unexplainable situation, soil may be acting as the
source of inoculum (Chona, 1980).
The role of C. falcatum, perpetuating in soil and initiating new infection is
yet to be elucidated unequivocally. Longevity of C. falcatum in soil, inoculated
artificially in October and kept in the open at Pusa, was for over seven months,
as against eight months in the laboratory (obviously 4 months i.e. Nov., Dec.,
Jan., and Feb. are the key winter months). On the other hand, during summer its
mycelium could not live longer than two months in the open and 2½ months in the
laboratory. Spore suspension in distilled water, stored in daylight at room
temperature was viable for 2½ months. In oatmeal agar medium (OMA),
mycelium survived under similar conditions for 6-7 months, while in a refrigerator
(50C), it survived for 7-8 months (Khanna, 1943). Chona and Nariani (1952)
found mycelium and spores to be viable for over 3 months in unsterilized soil and
Table 9.2. Survival of Colletotrichum falcatum in the affected stalk pieces
buried in soil
Survival in days 
Burial depth  
(cm) Winter (1973) Autumn (1974) 
5 63 34 
10 63 16 
15 63 34 
 (After Singh et al., 1977)
Epidemiology 101
soil-compost mixture and for 5 months in the former and 6 months in the latter
when they were sterilized. In compost, the fungus was not found to survive for
more than one month. This shows that the mycelium is unable to hold on its own
against other microorganisms, which offer a keen competition (Chona and
Nariani, 1954).
Another curious point one needs to ponder on is the very low survival of
C. falcatum in tissues of cane showing HS reaction, after the death and drying of
cane. After two weeks of harvesting of such canes, recovery of the fungus
gradually went down (correspondingly with the gradual loss of moisture) and
after one month, it became exceedingly difficult to isolate the pathogen. This
situation was encountered both in late and early part of the season. In the early
part, Trichoderma sp., Fusarium sp.,  and a species of basidiomyceteous fungus
follow C. falcatum  from behind and overtake the infected area very quickly,
leaving no room for the red rot pathogen. Similarly, late in the season, Fusarium,
Nigrospora, Chaetomium, the rind disease pathogen (Phaeocytostroma) and fungi
belonging to basidiomycetes overtake the red rot damaged cane (harvested cane
and kept under laboratory condition in December-January-February).
Disease management102
10
DISEASE MANAGEMENT
Before any attempt is made to manage a disease, it is imperative to go for
the SWOT analysis to understand the Strength and Weakness of any host-pathogen
system and to find out where the Opportunity lies and how to guard against the
Threat. The management of red rot is no exception to this general rule. The
pathogen and host both have their respective strengths and weaknesses which
one has to account for in developing any management strategy. These may be
outlined as follows:
Strength
1. It is essentially a sett-borne disease.
2. Only during the grand growth phase the disease is highly damaging.
3. Secondary spread is not very efficient and it hardly completes one or two
disease cycles in the season. Red rot is primarily a compound interest
disease, but mostly behaves as a simple interest one, in case of stalk
infection (sporulation on cane stalk appears after the death of the cane,
late in the season and available temperature and humidity in the winter
months do not allow establishment of successful infection). Secondary
spread from the inoculum developed in the spindle infection during the
early part of the crop growth is efficient but the new infection rarely results
in the development of another round of spindle infection and sporulation.
4. The pathogen is a transient visitor of soil and survives in soil as long as the
debris remains undecomposed on the soil surface.
5. Spores and mycelium of C. falcatum are favourite food of mites and do not
survive long in nature.
Disease management 103
6. Young affected shoots are often killed/devoured up by termites,
Trichoderma, bacteria, basidiomycetes, etc., thus put a natural check on
the sporulation and spread.
Weakness
1. Non-availability of immunity/ high degree of resistance in the available
sugarcane germplasm.
2. So far, no chemical has been identified that can effectively eradicate the
infection from the cane or cane sett.
3. Sett treatment is difficult due to bulky nature of seed-cane and impervious
nature of rind prevents the entry of fungitoxicants in sufficient quantity to
the target site.
4. Spraying in standing sugarcane crop is not a feasible option.
5. Monoculturing, ratooning, round the year availability of the cane crop as
well as often growing of the crop in a large contiguous area under a single
variety in factory command area.
6. Poor knowledge on genetics of sugarcane and basis of red rot resistance.
7. High variability of C. falcatum.
8. Difficulty in introgressing varied sources of resistance from the wild species
and quickly incorporating it in the commercial varieities.
Opportunity
Farmers, millers and policy planners are aware of the problem and are
responsive to any measures to contain the disease.
Threat
1. Complacency — at the level of farmers, millers and policy planners.
2. Inadequate supply of good quality seed-cane and lac k of strong seed
programme.
3. Practice of ratooning, a built in mechanism that aids in increasing the
disease severity and spread.
4. Once affected, the crop cannot be saved.
5. Unrestricted movement of cane.
Disease management104
Management of the disease: available options
At present, control measures in plant pathology are predominantly
preventive. In sugarcane, heat therapy is quite effective, and in many cases, it is
the only recommendation that can put a number of diseases under check (Singh
and Agnihotri, 1987; Duttamajumder and Agnihotri, 1992, Duttamajumder, 2002).
In sugarcane, due to the industrial nature of the crop, it is difficult to practice the
principles of avoidance for all practical purposes, as sugarcane has to be grown
in the mill-reserved zone to run the sugar mill. Avoidance, in some situations,
should be forced to prevent the spread of red rot e.g., in low lying and waterlogged
areas. Moreover, it has been observed that stress in the form of submergence
favours C. falcatum to consolidate available variability through fusion of conidia
(Duttamajumder et al., 1990). Appearance of spindle infection is concomitant
with early rains (May-June) and water stagnation helps in quick spread of the
disease.
Quarantine
The unrestricted movement of the seed-cane from one district or state to
another has largely been responsible for the migration of important disease
pathogens like C. falcatum in the past, and such spread is continuing surreptitiously.
Earlier, pathogens had spread to the new areas and now virulent pathotypes are
moving to new pastures (Duttamajumder and Agnihotri, 1992; Agnihotri and
Duttamajumder, 1994; Duttamajumder, 2002). Therefore, legislation as well as
its strict compliance is essential to curb spread of the disease. The sugar mills
have to take necessary precautions in the letter and spirit before introduction of
any genotype from other locations. This unrestricted introduction/movement of
cane has been responsible for the spread of red rot. To cite a recent example is
the introduction of CoJ 82 from western part to eastern part of U.P. (Barabanki).
Red rot flared up in the new environment and caused a wholesale damage
(Plate 2) or for that matter the indiscriminate introduction of seed-cane of
CoC 671 to Gujarat from Andhra Pradesh and elsewhere was responsible for the
colossal loss due to red rot.
Seed selection and field sanitation
Clean cultivation is the primary pre-requisite for growing a healthy
sugarcane crop. This starts with the selection and planting of healthy seed-cane
in a healthy field. This practice reduces the load of initial inoculum and helps in
checking the red rot. Timely removal of diseased plants in the early part of the
season (May, June, spindle infection), as and when detected, also helps in reducing
the inoculum available for the secondary spread. Removal of weeds also helps in
this direction, as this practice checks the growth of alternative hosts supporting
Disease management 105
the active growth of C. falcatum. Moreover, a weed free field boosts crop growth
and ensures better harvest.
At the Samalkota farm (in Andhra Pradesh) sett selection was regularly
carried out by Barber to check the red rot. Any sett with running red vascular
strand or red internode was rejected outright. Barber was perhaps the first worker
in sugarcane, to advocate this method of sett selection for fighting red rot menace
(Butler and Khan, 1913). Sett selection reduced the incidence of red rot
substantially but was unable to check the disease completely (Butler and Khan,
1913) and the disease continued until the variety was replaced with more resistant
one. This practice of sett selection should be religiously followed from the very
beginning of the field life of a new genotype, if one really desires to check the
damage from red rot. Many a times it has been observed that whenever seed
consciousness took a back seat due to some reason or the other, everybody from
the tillers to the millers, had to pay a heavy price due to red rot. Several red rot
epidemics that hit the Indian sugarcane, from time to time, bear this out.
Physical treatment: the viable option
Sugarcane, a vegetatively propagated crop, responds well to the use of
physical energy in the form of heat therapy/treatment. In this treatment, seed-
cane is exposed to a critical temperature that is lethal to the pathogen but not to
the sugarcane buds, and thus it effectuates a differential killing of the pathogen.
Incidentally, Kobus introduced heat treatment in sugarcane to get rid of the ‘Sereh’,
in Java. Use of heat energy has been tried in various forms (hot water, hot air,
moist hot air or aerated steam) with varying degrees of success against red rot
(Singh, 1973; Singh et al., 1980; Natarajan and Muthuswamy, 1981). Heat
treatment can root out fresh and superficial infections very well, but it becomes
largely ineffective against the deep-seated and dormant infections present in the
nodal region of seed cane (Srinivasan, 1971; Singh and Agnihotri, 1987). Complete
elimination of red rot pathogen was not achieved by the MHAT treatment at
54oC for 2½ hours (actual treatment time), however it significantly reduced the
number of surviving propagules/inocula causing infections later in the season
(Singh et al., 1980). Curative property of hot water treatment may be increased
by adding the desired fungicide which can tolerate the temperature of the water
or by using a post-fungicidal treatment (Singh and Agnihotri, 1987).
It will not be out of place to mention the controversy that engulfed the red
rot researchers in the 1970s regarding the effectiveness of heat treatment in
checking the sett-borne infections of C. falcatum. Under the guidance of
Dr. D. N Srivastava, the then ADG (PP), ICAR trials were conducted under the
AICRP(S) at Pusa, Shahjahanpur and Lucknow (for subtropical environment),
Disease management106
Anakapalle and Coimbatore (for tropical environment) to resolve the matter.
For heat treatment, both MHAT and HWT were used. From the outcome of
these trials, it was concluded that both the heat treatment procedures were effective
in checking the red rot, but cent per cent eradication was not possible.
However, it should be borne in mind that these trials were conducted with
full blown red rot affected canes and full blown diseased canes never get a chance
in planting. In a low level of infection, efficiency of heat treatment increases
substantially and thus, it was recommended to continue with the practice of heat
treatment of seed-cane. Moreover, heat treatment has other benefits also; it
checks sett-borne infections of smut, GSD, RSD and leaf scald. Nowadays, it is
mandatory to provide heat treatment to any parental material to be used for seed
production and distribution programmes in sugarcane.
Chemical treatment: a piquant situation
The primary aim to study any disease is to devise ways and means to keep
the pathogen under check so that its incidence and intensity as well as the resultant
effects remain below the economic injury level. The success of some
agrochemicals in controlling plant diseases provided necessary impetus and
opportunity for a better management of the crop. However, it should not be taken
as the panacea for all ills. The success of chemicals in other crop diseases has
given an impression that the plant protection chemicals will also prove effective
in controlling red rot of sugarcane. This is not so. Red rot is one such disease
where the pathogen has defied present day fungicides very well. Though these
fungicides are effective in checking the fungus in vitro, they fail miserably in
checking the pathogen in the cane tissues. This piquant situation is often attributed
to the lack of inhibitory concentration of fungicides at the target site to effect any
killing and eradication of the pathogen. Different workers have tried their hand
to workout a suitable chemical control  with available fungicides, but with no
appreciable success. From a mixture of limewater to dithiocarbamates, through
organo-mercurials to the systemic fungicides – everything, that was available or
that the workers could lay their hands on, were tried to achieve a control of this
disease in the field but with not so happy results.
Kirtikar and Verma (1963) reported that dipping healthy setts of red rot
susceptible variety Co 331 in mercurial, sulphur and copper fungicides of different
strengths for 10 min did not provide protection against red rot infection.
Chand et al. (1974) reported that one-hour treatment of setts of Co 312 with
Benomyl (0.25%) increased the germination over control by 50% and reduced
the incidence of red rot. Anzalone (1970) reported control of red rot with Benomyl
(100-200 ppm) when treated under pressure.
Disease management 107
Pandey and Agnihotri (1996); Rao and Satyanarayana (1995) tried to
combine the effectiveness of heat therapy (hot water treatment) with fungicides.
The former authors indicated almost complete control of red rot with fungicides
like Bavistin, Benomyl, Topsin M, Aretan at 0.1% level when added to hot water
tank and treated at 500C for 2 hours. Rao and Satyanarayana (1995) reported
effective control by treating single bud setts both at 500C for 2 hours or at 520C
for 30 min along with the treatment of Bavistin 0.1%. However, fungicidal
treatment alone was only partially effective in controlling sett-borne infection of
red rot, indicating effectiveness of this combination of both the treatments. As a
standard practice, hot water treated setts are further treated with fungicides to
guard against the ingress of opportunist microorganisms in the sett through the
Table 10.1 Effect of different fungicides on the recovery of Colletotrichum
falcatum after soaking of artificially infected single bud setts in
fungicide solution/suspension for 24 hours
No. of sett germinated Fungicides 
Healthy sett 
(25) 
Diseased sett 
(25) 
Recovery of 
fungus (%) 
No. of setts 
produced dis. plant 
Bavistin (0.2%) 24 96% 10 40% 81.3 2 
Topsin M (0.1%) 21 84% 4 16% 75.0 1 
Bayleton (0.2%) 20 80% 7 28% 68.8 1 
 (Adapted from Rao and Satyanarayana, 1995)
Table 10.2 Efficacy of hot water treatment and fungicidal treatment in
control of sett-borne infection of red rot in single bud setts
(Adapted from Rao and Satyanarayana, 1995)
Per cent tissues 
yielding  
red rot fungus 
Treatment 
Internal 
tissue 
Leaf  
scar 
Bud 
Percent  
germination 
Per cent  
germinants  
exhibiting  
red rot 
Hot water 50oC 2 hours 0.0 0.0 0.0 16.0 0.0 
Hot water 50oC 2 hours + Bavistin 0.1% 0.0 0.0 0.0 15.0 0.0 
Soaking setts in 0.1% Bavistin for 2 hours 26.6 13.3 8.0 28.0 28 .5 
Check (setts soaked in cold water) 80.0 53.3 66.6 8.0 100.0 
Hot water 52oC 30 min  0.0 0.0 0.0 40.0 0.0 
Hot water 52oC 30 min + Bavistin 0.1%  0.0 0.0 0.0 48.0 0.0 
Soaking setts in 0.1% Bavistin for 30 min 40.0 26.6 33.3 25.0 60.0 
 
Disease management108
cut ends. This treatment is essential as the natural microflora of the sugarcane,
which put a check on the various other microorganisms, also get badly affected
by the heat treatment and thus, the hot water treated setts need extra protection
in this regard.
Several fungicides, both systemic and non-systemic (e.g., Bavistin,
Vitavax, Topsin M, Aretan, Blitox, Dithane Z-78, Dithane M-45, etc. are
effective, in vitro, in killing C. falcatum but they do not provide satisfactory
control of the red rot disease under field conditions (Kirtikar and Singh, 1964;
Chand et al., 1974, Narasimharao and Satyanarayana, 1974).
Divergent views are found in abundance, both in support and against the
effectiveness of the chemical fungicides in controlling red rot in seed pieces and
standing cane. Better crop stand was achieved in many cases by treating the setts
with benomyl, carboxin, carbendazim, agallol, etc. and probably this was due to
better germination and establishment of the crop but not because of the actual
control of the pathogen. So is the case with the application of fungicides in the
standing crop. Different fungicides were able to check the mid-rib infection well
but failed miserably in checking the stalk infection. Thus, chemical control was
forced to take a back seat in the management of red rot. Of late, certain chemicals
(like salicylic acid, jasmonic acid, etc.) have come to the forefront for inducing
systemic resistance in cane plant. However, these are now at the preliminary
stage of experimentation to prove their worth against red rot.
The possible reasons for the ineffectiveness of the fungicides, as suggested
by Duttamajumder and Agnihotri (1992) are as follows:
i) Impervious nature of the cane rind prevents the entry of fugitoxicants.
ii) In case of limited entry, only sub-lethal amount of fungitoxicant reaches
the target site. This makes the fungicide ineffective in eradicating the red
rot pathogen from cane tissue.
iii) Lack of effective water-soluble systemic fungicides against C. falcatum
that can easily enter the cane sett and preferentially kill the fungus at the
target site.
iv) The toxic effect of the fungicide is effectively annulled by the abundant
nutrient present in the sett.
Three-tier seed programme: a sound option
Based on the success of MHAT (moist hot air treatment, at 540C for
2½ hours; actual treatment time) in checking sett-borne pathogens of sugarcane,
including red rot, a three-tier seed programme was launched for production and
distribution of healthy seed-cane to the sugarcane farmers (Singh, 1983). This
Disease management 109
heat treatment essentially eliminates/reduces the level of initial inoculum present
in/on the sett. This programme has three well defined stages, viz., (i) Breeder
seed, (ii) Foundation seed, and (iii) Certified seed. It starts with the production
of breeder seed that gives rise to foundation seed and in turn certified seed is
produced. The crop raised from heat-treated cane may be quickly reinfected by
the pathogens. Therefore, a strict vigil is necessary to guard against the possibilities
of reinfection and to maintain freedom from diseases.
The research carried out at the Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research,
Lucknow and elsewhere suggests that there is no single method available that
can manage red rot to one’s complete satisfaction. Due to this reason, red rot is
often termed as a ‘managerial disease’, and in pathologists parlance it is often
remarked that ‘what cannot be cured has to be endured’. In fact, from the very
beginning of red rot research in India, it responded well to various management
practices. The disease surfaced in a big way, only when major lapses (knowingly
or unknowingly) occurred. An integrated approach is a must to contain this
pathogen. Resistant varieties remain the most practical option to combat this
disease, even though C. falcatum is breaching the introduced resistance with
impunity in a regular fashion.  The integrated approach currently recommended
to achieve this goal is as follows:
i) Selection of the field having no immediate history of red rot. Preferably,
the field should be well drained/ upland type.
ii) Selection and use of healthy seed-cane.
iii) Where ever possible, the seed-cane should be subjected to MHAT.
iv) Chemical treatment of seed-cane with a fungicide like Dithane M-45,
Bavistin, etc. to protect against seed-borne as well as soil-borne inoculum
and also to protect the setts from secondary infections after MHAT.
v) Application of bio-agents like Trichoderma,  as sett- as well as
soil- treatment, at the time of planting and also on the trash mulch, used in
ratoon crop for moisture conservation, helps in faster degradation as well
as production and release of chemicals inhibitory to C. falcatum.
vi) Roguing of infected stools (entire clump) and spot application of fungicide
as and when disease is detected (pre monsoon) is necessary to reduce the
level of available inoculum in the field and to remove the focus of infection.
vii) Discouraging the practice of ratooning, if any incidence of red rot is
observed in the plant crop.
Epilogue110
11
EPILOGUE
No doubt, impressive work has been done on many aspects of the red rot
disease in India, yet there are many facets in the epidemiology and management
of the disease that need critical studies.
In epidemiology, the role of perfect stage remains a pathologist’s enigma.
How is the sexual reproduction in C. falcatum contributing to the generation of
new variability or development of new pathotypes and in the aerial spread of the
pathogen covering a large area ? Where does the inoculum come from to cause
the mid-rib infection in the pre-monsoon period? In addition, how does this
mid-rib infection contribute in the generation of new virulence in the pathogen?
No satisfactory answer is available even today. The exact role played by the
environmental factors like temperature, humidity, rainfall, light intensity, wind,
etc. need to be worked out in detail. The contribution of alternative hosts in
perpetuating virulent races of red rot pathogen is yet to be determined. Dispersal
mechanisms of infective propagules like conidia, ascospores, chlamydospores,
acervuli, etc. formed on cane plant during and after the rainy season need critical
evaluation. Available information is inadequate to explain the reason of
large-scale flare up of red rot covering hundreds of acres. The exact role of
perpetuating structures of the fungus like chlamydospores/ appressoria, thick
walled hyphae and setae in the epidemiology of the red rot, and the part played by
Fusarium and other associated microorganisms in accentuating the damage need
immediate attention of researchers. The role of associated bacteria needs critical
study, as C. falcatum when grown in sucrose medium or cane juice does not
produce typical sourly alcoholic smell, which is quite characteristically observed
in diseased canes of susceptible genotypes.
The nature of variability and existence of physiological races in C. falcatum
vis a vis sources of resistance in host have to be catalogued using modern molecular
Epilogue 111
biological techniques. Although a modest beginning has been made in this direction
(Khirbat et al., 1980; Anon., 1973-2005) – the task is formidable and serious
attempt has to be made to resolve the race picture. Preliminary RAPD and ISSR
analysis of the designated races did no good. The stability of C. falcatum pathotypes
in terms of virulence, growth and sporulation has always remained a puzzle to
those engaged in the research on red rot. Time and again, pathologists of different
genre have questioned the prudence of identification of races in red rot pathogen.
This apprehension has stemmed from the very instability of the pathogen in
retaining the gene governing pathogenicity. C. falcatum is too notorious to lose
virulence in culture. A critical molecular analysis of such cultures may help to
unravel this riddle – whether it is a case of mutation or gene silencing or any
other novel possibility. In the past hundred years of red rot research in India,
only six or seven pathotypes remained stable for a reasonable period of time,
even though loss of virulence was also noticed in the artificial culturing of these
pathotypes.  The loss of sporulation in artificial culture is another moot point in
this regard. Without the production of infective propagules (conidia), the fungus
cannot stand a chance of spread and survival in nature.
Red rot, even today continues to threaten sugarcane cultivation in India.
So far, no fungicide is available that can effectively eradicate internal infection
of red rot from seed-cane (setts). The challenge before research workers is to
make chemotherapy a viable proposition. Of late, induced systemic resistance
through the application of chemical inducers and bio-agents is opening up new
avenues to strengthen the existing resistance of the cane plant. It may hold promise
in increasing field life as well as stability of a variety. A concerted effort by all
concerned in this regard will definitely be rewarding and it will go a long way in
containing the menace of red rot.
Breeding and utilisation of resistant sugarcane variety/genotype has become
the mainstay in the perpetual fight against red rot in India. In spite of the immense
importance of resistant varieties, a directed breeding effort against red rot has
hardly been targeted to this end due to the complex inheritance of resistance. The
predominant breeding strategy still widely followed is the screening of elite clones
(genotype with good agronomic attributes) against red rot. This screening of
selected elite population has created an aura of false impression that high sugar
content in cane is associated with red rot susceptibility. The sugarcane ideotype
is essentially the noble cane (S. officinarum contributes 90% of the genome of
hybrid cane), which is fortified with desired level of tolerance to different stresses
including that caused by the pathogens. Obviously, progenies selected for better
agronomic qualities are skewed towards S. officinarum, which is susceptible.
An analysis of the data furnished by Azab and Chilto n (1952) and
Epilogue112
Alexander (1995) clearly shows that 50 per cent of the hybrid progenies are
susceptible. The inheritance pattern of the genes governing red rot needs to be
elucidated critically, leaving little or no room for speculation. So far, very limited
work has been carried out in this direction and in many cases, limited progeny
size did not allow proper analysis of inheritance pattern.
The success of S. spontaneum in imparting resistance to the hybrid progenies
however did not improve its chance as parent. Over a hundred-year of cane
breeding only a few S. spontaneum have been used for this purpose.  A look in the
parentage of the present day commercial hybrids immediately reflects the use of
S. spontaneum (for resistance) only at the early part of the development of
interspecific hybrids. There is hardly any fresh gene flow for resistance to red
rot in the new commercial hybrids. This situation eventually put a rider on the
genetic base of red rot resistance in the present day varieties. Thus, the red rot
resistance of the present day varieties stems from the permutations and
combinations of the existing genes obtained much earlier from a very limited
number of accessions of S. spontaneum. Pathogen population is no longer under
high pressure of survival due to non-introduction of new genes for resistance.
This, in turn is reflected in the very short field life span of a new cane genotype
as C. falcatum quickly overcomes the permutation-combination of the existing
genes.
The inherent difficulty in sugarcane breeding system, in crossing and
introgression of spontaneum complement, in producing the commercial cane
hybrids (lack of synchronization in flowering, development of hardly a few clones
of commercial merit at the first hybrid generation, etc.) along with the urgencies
in breeding commercial genotypes prompted the cane breeders to take the more
feasible route i.e., crossing between the hybrids. This indirectly has enforced
inherent weakness in the system by narrowing the genetic base. It is high time to
broaden the genetic base for red rot resistance. The problem of pyramiding the
resistance is accentuated by the non-availability of immunity/near immunity /
high degree of resistance against red rot in the parent population. Due to the
highly heterozygous nature of the crop and high ploidy level, the cane genome is
sufficiently buffered to take up such adventure with acceptable outcome.
The loss caused by red rot, at times is annihilating. In future, a forecasting
approach, based on analysis of weather parameters, may improve management
strategies to avoid serious losses. Obviously, healthy seed in a healthy field should
be the motto in controlling red rot. An effective quarantine and its strict compliance
is necessary at both macro-and micro-level to contain its spread in new area.
Sugar mills have to stop the prevalent practice of introduction of canes from
Epilogue 113
different regions without quarantine check. The fate of CoC 671 in Gujarat should
be taken as the warning signal in this regard. Once a variety becomes susceptible
to a pathotype in the field, it is difficult to prolong its field life without incurring
significant losses.
Time has come to change the mindset to achieve cent per cent control of
red rot in sugarcane. It is high time to learn to live with red rot amicably.
Introduction of resistance in host population is also not a permanent solution, as
has been experienced in the past. Introduced genes for resistance create a situation
to starve the pathogen and force the pathogen to find out new avenues for survival
(Duttamajumder and Verma, 1994). One is fully aware that hunger is the mother
of all discord and discontentment in human society; so is the case with the fungal
society. The food scarcity/forced hunger due to introduction of new genes for
resistance pushes the pathogen population to tap all its available resources to
devise a way to overcome this inflicted situation for survival. A happy situation
could be that when a majority of the cane varieties have moderate resistance and
thereby allow the pathogen to co-exist in a more peaceful way.
In fact, every organism has its own birthright to survive in this world. It
will be quite unjustified to try to wipe it out completely from the face of the earth.
C. falcatum has specialized itself to have sugarcane as its food and when food
supply is limited, it tries to adapt to the new food situation, not happily, but for
survival. This force-feeding often leads to the accumulation of matching genes in
the pathogen to counter the resistant action of the genotype. Whenever the pathogen
could muster the matching virulence gene(s), it attacked with vengeance (high
knocking intensity). It has been observed in many other crop-pathogen
combinations that when the matching gene becomes available in the pathogen to
counter the introduced resistance, the disease reaction is often much severe,
even greater than what a highly susceptible genotype displays with no or very
limited genes for resistance. Obviously any race specific resistance is always
vertical, whereas horizontal resistance is the rule of nature that is needed for
basic survival.
It will be unwise to overlook the fact that agriculture is hardly
200 generations old, and modern agriculture is only of 10 generations! Throughout
the millennium, nature has painstakingly maintained all the so-called susceptible
genotypes and that’s the legacy which has been inherited from the past. Today,
within the span of 10 generations the situation has been pushed to such an extent
that, at times, it becomes extremely difficult even to maintain a so-called modern
genotype in normal cultivation. If left alone, these genotypes may not survive in
nature at all. It is obvious that we are not in line with nature and it is high time
that we mend our ways for a better century.
References114
12
REFERENCES
Abbott, E.V. 1935. Physiologic specialization in Colletotrichum falcatum Went. Proc. ISSCT,
5 : 730-736.
Abbott, E. V. 1938. Red rot of sugar cane. USDA Agric. Tech. Bull. No. 641. 96 pp.
Abbott, E. V. and Hughes, C. G. 1961. Red rot.  In Sugarcane Diseases of the World, Vol.
I. J. P. Martin, E. V. Abbott and C. G. Hughes (Eds.), Elsevier, Amsterdam,
pp. 262-287.
Achutaramarao, M. and Sarma, M. N. 1982. Studies on parental influence on red rot
resistance in sugarcane seedlings. Sugarcane Pathol. Newsl., 29: 22-26.
Achutaramarao, M. and Satyanarayana, Y. 1983. Influence of red rot pathogen Physalospora
tucumanensis Speg. on quality of juices in different sugarcane varieties. Maharashtra
Sugar, 8: 53-54.
Achutaramarao, M. and Satyanarayana, Y. 1995a. Chemical control of sett-borne infection
of red rot pathogen. In Proc. National seminar on sugarcane production constraints
and strategies for research and management of red r ot. I.I.S.R., Lucknow.
pp. 323-330.
Achutaramarao, M. and Satyanarayana, Y. 1995b. Identification of red rot resistant varieties–
some improved screening techniques. In Proc. National seminar on sugarcane production
constraints and strategies for research and management of red rot. I.I.S.R., Lucknow.
pp. 347-353.
Agnihotri, V. P. 1990. Diseases of Sugarcane and Sugarbeet. (Revised Ed.) Oxford & IBH
Pub. Co. Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 483 pp.
Agnihotri, V. P. and Budhraja, T. R. 1974. Pathogenic potentialities of mid-rib isolates of
Colletotrichum falcatum in inciting stalk rot of sugarcane. Sugarcane Pathol. Newsl,
11/12: 19-21.
References 115
Agnihotri, V. P., and Singh, K. 1977. Seed-piece transmissible diseases of sugarcane and
their control measures. Sugar News, 2: 90-95.
Agnihotri, V. P., Budhraja, T. R. and Singh, K. 1979. Role of diseased sett and soil the
annual recurrence of red rot in sugarcane. Int. Sugar Jour., 82: 263-265.
Agnihotri, V.P. and Duttamajumder, S. K. 1994. Disease management practices in sugarcane:
past, present and future. In Current Trends in Sugarcane Pathology.  Rao, G. P.  et al.
(Eds.), Int.  Books  & Periodicals Supply Service, New Delhi, pp. 333-345.
Ahmed, H. U. 1973. Nitrogen utilisation of highly and weakly virulent isolates of
Colletotrichum falcatum Went. Mycopath et Mycol. Appl., 50: 223-227.
Alexander, K. C. 1979. Progress in resistance breeding for red rot and smut. Maharashtra
Sugar, 4: 89-91.
Alexander, K. C. 1995. Constraints in sugarcane protection strategy – An overview of
constraints in sugarcane disease management. In Proc. National seminar on sugarcane
production constraints and strategies for research and management of red rot. I.I.S.R.,
Lucknow. pp. 121-129.
Alexander, K. C. and Jothi, R. 1995. Current status of race flora of Colletotrichum falcatum
Went. In Proc. National seminar on sugarcane production constraints and strategies
for research and management of red rot. I.I.S.R., Lucknow. pp. 273-284.
Alexander, K. C. and Rao, M.M. 1976. Identification of genetic stocks possessing resistance
to red rot and smut. Sugarcane Breed. Newsl., 37: 10-14.
Alexander, K. C., Kandasamy, P. A., Ramanarao, T.C., Mohanraj, D. and Madhusudanrao,
M. 1979. A new approach to genetic defence against red rot disease of sugarcane.
Indian Sugar, 28: 695-696.
Alexander, K. C., Madhusudanrao, M., Mohanraj, D., Prakasham, N. and Padmanabhan,
P. 1990. Sources of resistance to red rot (Glomerella tucumanensis Arx and Muller)
and smut (Ustilago scitaminea Syd.) in different species of Saccharum. Sugarcane, 6:
10-12.
Alexander, K. C., Madhusudanrao, M., Mohanraj, D., Seshadri, K., Padmanabhan, P.,
Prakasham, N. and Kshirsagar, S. S. 1986. A new approach to improvement of red rot
resistance in sugarcane. Indian J. Mycol. and Plant Pathol., 16: 108-112.
Anonymous. 1918-2005. Annual Reports. Sugarcane Breeding Institute, Coimbatore.
Anonymous. 1953-2005. Annual Reports. Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow.
Anonymous. 1959. Review of sugarcane research in India-1929-54. The Indian Central
Sugarcane Committee, New Delhi. pp. 62-73.
Anonymous. 1973-2005. Reports of Plant Pathology. All India Co-ordinated Research Project
(Sugarcane). I.I.S.R., Lucknow.
Anonymous. 1983. 70 years of Sugarcane Research (1912-1981). Part I. Research findings.
pp. 1-117. U.P. Council of Sugarcane Research, Shahjahanpur.
References116
Anonymous. 1987. Abstract of research publications. Platinum Jubilee (1912-1987). SBI,
Coimbatore, 242 pp.
Anzalone, L. 1970. Air pressure incorporation of fungicides into short stalk sections of
sugarcane for the control of red rot. Phytopathology, 60 : 741-742.
Appalanarasiah, P. 1974. Further studies on the role of sugarcane borers in the spread of the
red rot infection. Sugarcane Pathol. Newsl., 11/12: 11.
Appalanarasiah, P., Satyanarayana, Y. and Krishnamurthy, M. M. 1971. Role of sugarcane
borers in the spread of red rot infection. Co-operative Sugar, 2(9): 442-444.
Atkinson, R.E. 1938. On the nature of resistance to red rot. Proc. ISSCT, 6 : 684-692.
Azab, Y. E. and Chilton, S. J. P. 1952. Studies on inheritance of resistance to red rot
disease of sugarcane. Phytopathology, 42: 282.
Azab, Y. E. and Chilton, S. J. P. 1959. Inheritance of resistance and susceptibility of
sugarcane to the red rot fungus (Physalospora tucumanensis Speg.).  Proc. ISSCT, 10:
1127-1129.
Bajaj, B. S. and Chatrath, M. S. 1960. Growth phase method for mutant screening in
Colletotrichum falcatum Went. Indian Phytopathology, 13: 156-159.
Bajaj, B. S., Chatrath, M. S. and Vasudeva, R. S. 1964. Mutation in Colletotrichum falcatum,
the causal organism of red rot of sugarcane. IV. Morphological and biochemical
mutants induced by ionizing radiation. Indian Phytopathology, 17: 296-303.
Bajaj, B. S., Chatrath, M. S. and Vasudeva, R. S. 1965a. Mutation in Colletotrichum
falcatum, the causal organism of red rot of sugarcane. V. Pathogenicity of biochemical
mutants. Indian Phytopathology, 18: 133-138.
Bajaj, B. S., Chatrath, M. S. and Vasudeva, R. S. 1965b. Mutation in Colletotrichum
falcatum, the causal organism of red rot of sugarcane. VI. Induced biochemical mutants
as test organisms for bioassay of p-aminobenzoic acid and biotin. Indian Phytopathology,
18: 253-256.
Bajaj, B. S., Ganju, P. L. and Chatrath, M. S. 1959. Mutation in Colletotrichum falcatum
Went, the causal organism of red rot of sugarcane II. Induced fast neutrons. Indian
Phytopathology, 12: 53-58.
Barber, C. A. 1901. Sugarcane diseases in Godavari and Ganjam districts. Madras Dept.
Land Records and Agric. v. 2, Bull. 43: 181-194.
Barber, C. A. 1906. The Samalkota sugarcane farm. Agric. Jour. India (part I.), 1:44-48.
Barber, C.A. 1916. The classification of Indian canes. Agric. J. India, 11:371-376.
Barber, C.A. 1918. Studies in Indian sugar canes, No. 3. The classification of Indian canes
with special reference to Saretha and Sunnabile groups. Mem. Dept. Agric. India,
Bot. Ser., 9:133-207.
Beniwal, M. S., Satyavir, and Virk, K. S. 1989. Pathogenic variability in Colletotrichum
falcatum, incitant of red rot of sugarcane. Indian Phytopathology, 42: 95-98.
References 117
Beniwal, M. S., Taneja, A. D., Satyavir, Khirbat, S. K. 1988. Phenols in relation to
sugarcane resistance against red rot disease. Bhartiya Sugar, 13: 49-52.
Beniwal, M.S. and Satyavir. 1991. Effect of atmospheric temperature on the development
of red rot of sugarcane. Indian Phytopathology, 44: 333-338.
Bhansali, R. R. Singh, N. and Singh, K. 1985. Movement of 32P labelled red rot pathogen in
sugarcane stalks. Indian J. Plant Pathology, 3: 80-82.
Bhat, N.R. 1987. My reminiscences of the Sugarcane Breeding Institute, Coimbatore. In
Platinum Jubilee Souvenir of SBI, Coimbatore, Vol. 1. Sugarcane Breeding Institute,
Coimbatore. pp.12-14.
Bhat, N. R. and Srinivasan, K. V. 1961. Can varieties answer the disease problem in
sugarcane? Indian Sugar, 11: 639-643.
Bremer, G. 1961. Problems in breeding and cytology of sugarcane. Euphytica, 10: 59-78.
Bull, T. A. and Glasziou, K. T. 1963. The evolutionary significance of sugar accumulation
in Saccharum. Aus. J. Biol. Science, 16: 737-742.
Butler, E. J. 1906. Fungus diseases of sugarcane in Bengal. Mem.  Dept. Agr. India, Bot.
Ser. 1: 1-53. (Red rot  pp. 2-24).
Butler, E. J. 1918. Fungi and diseases in plants. Thacker Spink & Co., Calcutta. 547 pp.
Butler, E. J. and Khan, H. A. 1913. Red rot of sugarcane. Mem. Dept. Agric.  India, Bot.
Ser., 6: 151-178.
Buxton, E.W. 1959. Mechanisims of variation in Fusarium oxysporum in relation to host
parasite interactions. In. Plant Pathology : Problems and Progress 1908-1958. Holton,
C.S. et al (eds.). American Phytopathological Society. pp. 183-191.
Carvajal, F. and Edgerton, C. W. 1943. The perfect stage of Colletotrichum falcatum.
Phytopathology, 33: 2. (Abstract).
Carvajal, F. and Edgerton, C. W. 1944. The perfect stage of Colletotrichum falcatum.
Phytopathology, 34: 206-213.
Carvalho, P.C.T.de, 1968. Heterokaryosis in Colletotrichum falcatum Went. Proc. ISSCT.,
13 : 1251-1261.
Chand, J. N., Dang, J. K. and Kapoor, T. R. 1974. Systemic chemicals as sugarcane sett
protectants. Sci. & Cult., 40: 69-70.
Chandrika, S. Padmanaban, P., Seshadri, K. and Alexander, K. C. 1984. Toxic metabolite
production by Colletotrichum falcatum  causing red rot of sugarcane.  Indian
Phytopathology, 37: 685.
Chatrath, M. S. and Bajaj, B. S. 1964. Studies on the physiology and pathogenicity of an
avirulent strain of Colletotrichum falcatum Went. Ind. J. Sugar Res. and Development,
8: 288-292.
References118
Chattopadhyay, S. B. and Sarkar, A. 1957. Strains of Colletotrichum falcatum Went in
West Bengal. Indian Jour. Mycol. Res., 3: 25-28.
Chaudhary, B. S., Mehla, A. S., Virk, K. S. and Pal, R. 1995. Breeding for red rot resistance
in sugarcane (Saccharum hybrid complex): review, concept and theory. In Proc.
National seminar on sugarcane production constraints and strategies for research and
management of red rot. I.I.S.R., Lucknow. pp 221-232.
Chaudhary, B. S., Virk, K. S. and Ram, K. 1988. Inheritance of red rot resistance in
sugarcane. Agric. Science Digest, 8: 210-212.
Chiranjivirao, K., Krishnamurthy, T. N., Lalitha, E. and Rajalakshmi, V. K. 1968.
Phenols in relation to resistance of sugarcane varieties to red rot disease. Curr. Sci.,
37: 532-534.
Chona, B. L. 1943. Red-rot of sugarcane and its control. Indian Farming,  4: 27-32.
Chona, B. L. 1950. Studies on the diseases of sugarcane. III. Sources and modes of red-rot
infection. Indian J. agric. Sci., 20: 363-385.
Chona, B. L. 1954. Studies on the diseases of sugarcane in India. IV. Relative resistance of
sugarcane varieties to red rot. Indian J. agric. Sci., 24: 301-315.
Chona, B.L. 1956. Address of Chairman, Pathology Section. Proc. ISSCT., 9 : 975-986.
Chona, B. L. 1980. Red rot of sugarcane and sugar industry - a review. Indian Phytopathology,
33: 191-207.
Chona, B. L. and Bajaj, B. S. 1953. Occurrence in nature of Physalospora tucumanensis
Speg., the perfect stage of sugarcane red rot organism in India. Indian Phytopathology,
6: 63-65.
Chona, B. L. and Bajaj, B. S. and Sharma, R. 1964. Perithecial production by different
strains of Glomerella tucumanensis (Speg.) Arx and Muller. Indian Phytopathology,
17: 241-244.
Chona, B. L. and Hingorani, M. K. 1950a. Mutation in Colletotrichum falcatum Went, the
causal organism of sugarcane red rot. Phytopathology, 40: 221-227.
Chona, B. L. and Hingorani, M. K. 1950b. Comparative studies of certain isolates of
Colletotrichum falcatum Went. Indian Phytopathology, 3: 196-202.
Chona, B. L. and Nariani, T. K. 1952. Investigations on the survival of Colletotrichum
falcatum Went in soil. Indian Phytopathology, 5: 152-157
Chona, B. L. and Nariani, T. K. 1954. Investigations on the survival of the sugarcane red
rot fungus in the compost. In Proc. 2nd Bien. Conf. Sugarcane Research and Development
Workers, 1: 103-104.
Chona, B. L. and Padwick, G.W. 1942. More light on the red rot epidemic. Indian Farming,
3(2): 70-73.
Chona, B. L. and Srivastava, D. N. 1952. The perithecial stage of Colletotrichum falcatum
Went in India. Indian Phytopathology, 5: 158-160.
References 119
Chona, B. L. and Srivastava, D. N. 1960. Variations in Colletotrichum falcatum Went, the
causal organism of red rot of sugarcane. Indian Phytopathology, 13: 58-65.
Chona, B. L., Bajaj, B. S. and Sharma, R. 1960. A new stroma forming strain of Colletotrichum
falcatum  Went. In Proc. 4 th All India Conference of Sugarcane Research and
Development Workers, Waltair-1960. 4: 620-621.
Chona, B. L., Bajaj, B. S., Agrawal, H. O. and Sreenivasan, T. N. 1960. A note on the
factors influencing perithecial production in Glomerella tucumanensis (Speg.) Arx and
Muller. In Proc. 4th All India Conference of Sugarcane Research and Development
Workers, Waltair-1960, 4: 624-626.
D’Hont, A. and Glaszmann, J.C. 2001. Sugarcane genome analysis with molecular markers,
a first decade of research. Proc. ISSCT., 24: 556-559.
D’Hont, A., Lu, Y. H., Paulet, F., and Glaszmann, J.C. 2002. Oligoclonal interspecific
origin of ‘North Indian’ and ‘Chinese’ sugarcanes. Chromosome Research ,
10: 253-262.
Dakshinamurthy, V.  and Satyanarayana, Y. 1973.  A new technique for red rot inoculation
on sugarcane.  Journal of Sri Venkateswara Agril.  College, 2: 50-53.
Daniels, J and Daniels, C. A. 1975. Geographical, historical and cultural aspect of the
origin of the Indian and Chinese sugarcanes S. barberi and S. sinense. Sugarcane
Breed. Newsl., 36: 4-23.
Daniels, J and Daniels, C. A. 1976. A note on red rot disease, Physalospora tucumanensis
Speg., and origin of sugarcane. Sugarcane Breeds. Newsl., 37: 17-19.
Daniels, J and Roach, B. T. 1987. Taxonomy and evolution of sugarcane. In Sugarcane
Improvement through Breeding. Heinz, D. J. (Ed.). Elsevier Press, Amsterdam.
pp. 7-84.
Daniels, J., Smith, P., Paton, N. and Williams, C. 1975. The origin of the genus Saccharum.
Sugarcane Breed. Newsl., 36: 24-39.
Deerr, N. 1949. The History of Sugar. Vol. 1. Chapman & Hall, London. 258 pp.
Dey, P. K. 1933. The red rot of sugarcane. Dept. of Agric. U.P., Bull. 66, 4 pp.
Dey, P. K. 1935. Diseases of sugarcane. J. Sci. Tech. India, 2: 23-30.
Dutt, N.L. 1947. Sugarcane improvement in India. Indian Sugar, 10:187-191.
Dutt, N.L. 1954. In Proc. Bienn. Conf. of Sugarcane Research and Development Workers.
p. 24.
Dutta, A. K. 1973. Studies on some host factors affecting perithecial development in
Colletotrichum falcatum Went. Sci. & Cult., 39: 227-228.
Dutta, A. K., Chona, B. L. and Bajaj, B. S. 1964. Effect of growth inhibitory substances on
perithecial development of Colletotrichum falcatum Went. Indian J. Expt. Biol.,
2: 60-61.
References120
Dutta, A. K., Chona, B. L. and Bajaj, B. S. 1965. Effect of hexose phosphates and ultraviolet
irradiation on perithecial development in Glomerella tucumanensis . Indian
Phytopathology, 18: 274-281.
Duttamajumder, S. K. 1991. History of sugarcane. Sugar Crops Newsletter, 1: 3-4.
Duttamajumder, S. K. 1997. Butler-Plug method of inoculation and red rot. Sugar Crops
Newsletter, 7(1&2): 7-8.
Duttamajumder, S. K. 2002. A century of red rot disease of sugarcane in India. In Sugarcane
Crop Management. Singh, S.B., Rao, G.P. and Easwarmoorthy, S. (Eds.). Sci Tech
Publishing, Houston, Texas, USA. pp. 52-108.
Duttamajumder, S. K. and Agnihotri, V. P. 1992. Management of sugarcane diseases -
Problems and progress. In Farming Systems and Integrated Pest Management. Verma
J. P. and Varma, A. (Eds.). Malhotra Pub. House, New Delhi. pp. 147-158.
Duttamajumder, S. K. and Agnihotri, V.P. 1995. Problem, progress and management of red
rot of sugarcane - A century old disease problem of India. In Detection of Plant
Pathogens and Their Management. Verma, J. P., Varma, A and Kumar, D. (Eds.).
Angkor Publishers  (P) Ltd., New Delhi, pp.  337- 348.
Duttamajumder, S. K. and Dwivedi, R.1995. A new electro-mechanical power device and
its superior performance in the inoculation of red rot pathogen in sugarcane. Ind. J.
Sugarcane Technol., 10: 136-138.
Duttamajumder, S. K. and Misra, S. C. 2004. Towards an ideal method of inoculation for
screening sugarcane genotypes against red rot caused by Colletotrichum falcatum.
Indian Phytopathology, 57: 24-29.
Duttamajumder, S. K. and Singh, R. P. 1999. Revised criteria for grading resistance against
red rot disease of sugarcane. Indian Phytopathology, 52: 157-159.
Duttamajumder, S.K. and Verma, J.P. 1994. Population dynamics of pathogenicity genes of
Xanthomonas campestris pv. malvacearum in nature. J. Phytopathology ,
140 : 145-152.
Duttamajumder, S. K., Singh, N. and Agnihotri, V. P. 1990. Behaviour of Colletotrichum
falcatum under waterlogged condition. Indian Phytopathology, 43: 227-229.
Duttamajumder, S. K., Singh, N. and Lal, R. 1991. A simple technique for maintenance
and multiplication of Colletotrichum falcatum in virulent form. Plant Dis. Res.,
6: 58-60.
Earle, F.S. 1928. Sugar Cane and its Culture. John Wiley & Sons, New York. 355 pp.
Edgerton, C. W. 1959.  Sugarcane and its Diseases. (2nd ed.) Louisiana State Univ. Press,
Baton Rouge. 301 pp.
Edgerton, C. W. and Carvajal, F. 1944. Host-parasite relations in red rot of sugarcane.
Phytopathology, 34: 827-837.
References 121
Edgerton, C. W. and Moreland, C.C. 1920. Effect of fungi on the germination of sugarcane.
Louisiana Agric. Expt. Station Bull., No. 169, 40 pp.
Edgerton, C.W. 1910. Colletotrichum falcatum in the United States. Science, 31 : 717-718.
Flor, H.H. 1942. Inheritance of pathogenicity of Melampsora lini. Phytopathology,
32 : 653-669.
Flor, H.H. 1953. Epidemiology of flax rust in the North Central States. Phytopathology,
43 : 624-628.
Flor, H. H. 1955. Host-parasite interaction in flax rust-its genetics and other implications.
Phytopathology, 45: 680-685.
Flor, H.H. 1956. The complementary genic systems in flax and flax rust. Adv. Genet.
8 : 29-54.
Grassl, C.O. 1946. Saccharum robustum and other wild relatives of “noble” sugarcane.
Jour. Arnold Arbor., 27:234-252.
Gupta, S. C. 1980. Importance of varietal screening against red rot disease of sugarcane.
Indian Phytopathology, 33: 388-390.
Gupta, S. C., Singh, M. P. and Upadhaya, U. C. 1980. A new biotype of Colletotrichum
falcatum Went. Curr. Sci., 49: 600-601.
Howard, A. 1903. On some diseases of sugar cane in the West Indies.  Ann. Bot.,
17: 373-411.
Irvine, J. E. 1999. Saccharum species as horticultural classes. Theor. Appl. Genet .,
98: 186-194.
Jagathesan, D., Balasundaram, N. and Alexander, K. C. 1973. Induced mutations for disease
resistance in sugarcane. Proc. Res. Co-ordn. Meet. Induced Mutn. Dis. Resist. Crop
Plant. IAEA, Novisad, Vienna. pp. 151-153.
Jaglan, B. S., Virk, K. S. and Satyavir. 1995. Studies on the nature of red rot resistance in
sugarcane. In Proc. National seminar on sugarcane production constraints and strategies
for research and management of red rot. I.I.S.R., Lucknow. pp. 357-363.
Jeswiet, J. 1929. The development of selection and breeding of the sugarcane in Java. Proc.
ISSCT., 3: 44-57.
Khanna, K.L. 1943. Annual Report. Central Sugarcane Res. Station, Pusa.
Khanna, K.L. 1954. In Proc. Bienn. Conf. of Sugarcane Research and Development Workers.
p. 23.
Khirbat, S. K., Satyavir, and Beniwal, M. S. 1980. Physiological and pathological variability
in sugarcane red rot pathogen Colletotrichum falcatum  in Haryana. Indian
Phytopathology, 33: 296-299.
Kirtikar 1959. Physiological specialisation in red rot pathogen. Indian Sugar, 8: 797-799.
References122
Kirtikar 1960. Variations in red rot flora in Uttar Pradesh. In Proc. 4th All India Conf.
Sugarcane Res. and Development Workers, Waltair-1960, 4: 583-589.
Kirtikar and Singh, D. K. 1964. Recent achievements in controlling red rot in Uttar Pradesh.
Indian Sugar, 12: 223-238.
Kirtikar and Singh, D. R. 1951. Varietal resistance to red rot. In Proc.1st   Bienn. Conf.
Sugarcane Research and Development Workers, India, Part II(3): 66-71.
Kirtikar and Singh, D. R. 1954. Recurrence of red rot epidemics in Uttar Pradesh. In Proc.
2nd Bien Conf. Sugarcane Research and Development Workers, 2: 62-63.
Kirtikar and Singh, D. R. 1956. Some aspects of controlling red rot in Uttar Pradesh. Proc.
ISSCT, 9: 1089-1096.
Kirtikar and Verma, H.S. 1963. Role of chemicals in sugarcane disease control. Indian
Sugar, 13 : 139-141.
Kirtikar, Rana, O. S. and Gupta, S. C. 1964. A new virulent strain of Glomerella tucumanensis
Arx and Muller. Indian Sugar, 9: 27-31.
Kirtikar, Rana, O. S. and Gupta, S. C. 1965. An intermediate type virulent isolate of
Colletotrichum falcatum in Eastern Uttar Pradesh. Indian Sugar, 10: 161-163.
Kirtikar, Srivastava, D. D. and Singh, D. R. 1965. Control of red rot of sugarcane.  Curr.
Sci., 24: 227.
Kulkarni, G. S. 1911. Preliminary study of the red rot of sugarcane in Bombay Presidency.
Dept. Agri. Bombay Bull., 44, pp 8.
Kumar, A., Satyavir and Niwas, R. 1998. Relationship between climatic factors and initiation
of red rot in sugarcane. Indian Phytopathology, 51: 370-372.
Kumar, A., Satyavir and Niwas, R. 1999. Quantitative relationship between red rot
development and weather variables in sugarcane under field conditions. Indian J. Sug.
Technol., 14:10-16.
Lewin, H. D., Muthuswamy, S. and Sanjeevi, P. S. 1978. Role of mid-rib lesion isolates of
Glomerella tucumanensis in causing red rot in sugarcane. Sugarcane Pathol. Newsl.,
20: 13-16.
Lewin, H., Natarajan, S. and Rajan, S. D. 1976. Control of sugarcane red rot (Physalospora
tucumanensis Speg.) by chemotherapy. Sugarcane Pathol. Newsl., 17: 17-20.
Lewton-Brain, L. 1908. Red rot of sugarcane stem. Expt. Sta. Hawaiian Sugar Planters’
Assoc. Div. Path. and Physiol. Bull. No. 8, 44 pp.
Luthra. J. C., Sattar, A. and Singh, K. 1932. Sugarcane Colletotrichum. In Proc. 19th
Indian Science Congress, p-302.
Madan, V.K., Solomon, S. and Agnihotri, V.P. 1992. Biochemical aspects of sugarcane
diseases. Tech. Bull., I.I.S.R., Lucknow, 90 pp.
References 123
Malathi, P., Viswanathan, R., Padmanaban, P., Mohanraj, D. and Sundar, A. R. 2002.
Microbial detoxification of Colletotrichum falcatum toxin. Curr. Sci., 83: 745-749.
Mangelsdorf, A.J. 1959. Sugarcane breeding methods. Proc. ISSCT., 10:694-701.
Manocha, M. S. and Vasudeva, R. S. Factors affecting the pathogenicity of Colletotrichum
falcatum Went causing red rot of sugarcane. Indian J. agric. Sci., 34: 264-272.
Manocha, M.S. 1963. Utilization of sucrose by Colletotrichum falcatum isolates, causing
red rot of sugarcane. Ind. J. Microbiol., 3 : 109-112.
Manocha, M.S. 1965. Effect of different carbon and nitrogen sources on growth and sporulation
of Colletotrichum falcatum Went isolates. Ind. J. Microbiol., 5 : 21-25.
Massee, M.G. 1893. Report on ‘root disease’ of sugar cane in Barbados. Roy. Bot. Garden,
Kew, Bull. Misc. Inform. 84 : 347-348.
Mehta, P. P. and Singh, R. N. 1957. Sources of red rot infection, some observations in
North Bihar. Indian Sugar, 7: 337-339.
Menon, R. G. and Singh, K. 1960. The I.I.S.R. sugarcane inoculator. Indian J. Sugarcane
Res. and Development, 4: 249-250.
Mishra, M. M. 1995. Role of BO varieties in minimising the red rot incidence in Bihar. In
Proc. National seminar on sugarcane production constraints and strategies for research
and management of red rot. I.I.S.R., Lucknow. pp. 354-356.
Mohanraj, D., Padmanaban, P., Jothi, R. and Alexander, K. C. 1995. Possible role of
phytotoxin(s) in red rot disease of sugarcane. In Proc. National seminar on sugarcane
production constraints and strategies for research and management of red rot. I.I.S.R.,
Lucknow. pp 263-270.
Mohanraj, D., Padmanaban, P., Viswanathan, R. and Alexander, K. C. 1997. Sugarcane
screening for red rot resistance. Sugarcane, 1997. (3): 18-23.
Nair, S. S., Potty, N. N., Mathew, A. V., Alexander, K. C. and Singh, K. 1984. Red rot
and other seed piece transmissible diseases of sugarcane in Kerala.  Indian Sugar, 33:
815-816.
Narasimharao, G. and Satyanarayana, Y. 1974. Studies in control of sett borne infection of
red rot of sugarcane.  Journal of Research APAU, 1(2,3): 83-86.
Natarajan, S. and Muthuswamy, S. 1981. Effect of aerated steam treatment on the incidence
of red rot (Colletotrichum falcatum Went) of sugarcane. Int. Sugar Jour., 83: 300-301.
Olufolaji, D. B. 1994. Cultural condition for growth and sporulation of Colletotrichum
falcatum (sugarcane red rot fungus). Cryptog. Mycol., 15: 207-218.
Olufolaji, D. B. and Bambgoye, A. O. 1986. Production, partial characterization and bioassay
of toxins from Physalospora tucumanensis Speg., sugarcane red rot fungus. Cryptog.
Mycol.,  7: 331-334.
References124
Padmanaban, P., Mohanraj, D., Viswanathan, R., Madhusudhanarao, M., Prakasam, N.,
Jothi, R. and Alexander, K. C. 1996. Differential interaction of sugarcane clones to
pathotypes of Colletotrichum falcatum Went. Sugarcane, 1996. (4): 16-20.
Padwick, G. W. 1940. The red rot epidemic. Indian Farming, 1(6): 263-267.
Pandey, L. N. and Sakal, R. 1974. New pathogenic strain of P. tucumanensis Speg. in Uttar
Pradesh. Indian Sugar, 24: 707-709.
Pandey, S. and Agnihotri, V. P. 1996. Elimination of red rot infection in seed-pieces by
chemotherapy: a new approach in disease control.  Indian Phytopathology, 49: 48-51.
Pant, A. D. 1947. A review of the red rot epidemic on sugarcane in U.P. in the crop season
1946-47. Indian Sugar, 10: 84-85.
Parthasarathy, N. 1946. Probable origin of North Indian sugarcanes. J. Ind. Bot. Society,
25:133-150.
Prakasam, P. 1971. Ecological relationship among three fungi viz. Cephalosporium sacchari
Butler, Physalospora tucumanensis Speg. and Fusarium sp. associated with disease of
sugarcane. Sugarcane Pathol.  Newsl., 7: 22-23.
Prakasam, P. 1974. The significance of red rot epidemics in Andhra Pradesh. Co-operative
Sugar, 5(10):1-4.
Prakasam, P. and Appalanarasiah, P. 1964. Study of red rot flora in Andhra Pradesh. The
Andhra Agric.  Jour., 11(5): 210-213.
Prakasam, P. and Appalanarasiah, P. 1971.  An unusual leaf spot of sugarcane caused by
Physalospora tucumanensis Speg. Sugarcane Pathol.  Newsl., 7: 12.
Prakasam, P. and Venkatareddy, T. C. 1961. Occurrence of a light race of Colletotrichum
falcatum Went in Andhra Pradesh. Science & Culture, 27: 250-251.
Prakasam, P., Appalanarasiah, P., and Satyanarayana, Y. 1971. Note on an improved method
of screening sugarcane varieties against red rot disease. Indian J. agric. Sci., 41:
1131-1133.
Prasadarao, K. K. 1979. Studies in parental influence in resisting red rot and smut by
sugarcane seedlings at Sugarcane Research Station, Anakapalle. Maharashtra Sugar,
11(1): 95-98.
Prasadarao, K. K. 1985. Throwing out the babies with bath water. Sugar J. of South Indian
Sugarcane and Sugarcane Technologists’ Association, 11: 21-25.
Prasadarao, K. K. 1987. From prestilence to prosperity in Andhra Pradesh. In Platinum
Jubilee Souvenir of SBI, Coimbatore. Vol. I. Sugarcane Breeding Institute, Coimbatore.
pp. 24-30.
Prasadarao, K. K., Sarma, M. N., Satyanarayana, Y. and Achutaramarao, M. 1977.
Discriminant function as reliable guide for assessing varietal reaction to red rot of
sugarcane.  Proc. ISSCT, 16: 295-401.
References 125
Prasadarao, K.K. (Eds.) 1989. Seventy five years of agricultural research at Anakapalle.
RARS, Anakapalle, Andhra Pradesh. 400 pp.
Raciborski, M. 1897. De bestrijding van het rood snot. Arch. Java Suikeridustrie ,
5: 1133-1135.
Rafay, S. A. 1950. Another strain of Physalospora tucumanensis. Curr. Sci., 19: 385-386.
Rafay, S. A. 1953. Pathogenicity, spread and reversion of Physalospora tucumanensis. Proc.
Indian Acad. Sci., 38(B): 99-100.
Rafay, S. A. and Padmanabhan, S. Y. 1941. Strains of Colletotrichum falcatum. Curr.  Sci.,
10: 25-26.
Rafay, S. A. and Padmanabhan, S. Y. 1947. Variations in Colletotrichum falcatum Went.
Proc. 34th Indian Science Congress. , Pt.  III: 228.
Rafay, S. A. and Singh, V. B. 1957. A new strain of Glomerella tucumanensis. Curr. Sci.,
26: 19-20.
Rafay, S. A. and Singh, V. B. 1959. Primary and secondary infectno of red rot. In Proc. 3rd
All India Conf. Sugarcane Res. & Dev. Workers, 3: 333-335.
Rafay, S. A. and Singh, V. B. 1959. The role of red rot lesions on mid-ribs. In Proc. 3rd All
India Conf. Sugarcane Res. & Dev. Workers, 3: 335-338.
Ramakrishnan, T. S. 1941. Studies in the genus Colletotrichum II. Physiological studies on
Colletotrichum falcatum Went. Proc. Indian Acad. Sci., 14(B): 395-411.
Ramakrishnan, T. S. 1949. Studies in the genus Colletotrichum. IV. Leaf spot of Arundo
donax L. caused by Colletotrichum falcatum Went var. arundinis var. nov. Proc.
Indian Acad. Sci., 29B: 289-294.
Rana, O. S. and Gupta, S. C. 1968. An easy method of screening out red rot susceptible
varieties at initial stages of multiplication. Indian Sugar, 18: 447-452.
Rao, A.M. and Satyanarayana, Y. 1995. Chemical Control of sett-borne infection of red rot
pathogen. In Proc. National seminar on sugarcane production constraints and strategies
for research and management of red rot. I.I.S.R., Lucknow. pp. 323-330.
Rao, J. T. Srinivasan, K. V. and Alexander, K. C. 1966. A red rot resistant mutant of
sugarcane induced by gamma irradiation. Proc. Indian Acad. Sci., Sect. B.,
64: 224-230.
Rao, K. C., Krishnamurthy, T. N., Lalitha, E. and Rajlakshmi, V. K. 1968. Phenols in
relation to resistance of sugarcane varieties to red rot dise ase. Curr. Sci.,
37: 532-534.
Robinson, P.E. 1962. Appraisal of some cane disease control measures. Proc. ISSCT.,
11 : 728-742.
Saharan, H. S. and Satyavir 1994. Efficacy of bavistin on the incidence of red rot of sugarcane
caused by Colletotrichum falcatum Went. Crop Res. 8 : 415-417
References126
Sandhu, S. S., Bhatti, D. S. and Rattan, B. K. 1969. Extent of losses in sugarcane caused by
red rot (Physalospora tucumanensis Speg.) and smut (Ustilago scitaminea Syd.). Jour.
Research (PAU, Ludhiana), 6: 341-344.
Sandhu, S. S., Mohan, V. K. and Singh, K. 1974. Role of mid-rib lesions in the epidemiology
of red rot caused by Colletotrichum falcatum  Went in Punjab. Indian Sugar,
24: 391-995.
Sarkar, A. 1960. Comparative studies of two races of Colletotrichum falcatum Went. Science
& Culture, 26: 83-84.
Sarma, M. N. 1970. Occurrence of a new strain of Physalospora tucumanensis. Science &
Culture, 36(1): 52-54.
Sarma, M. N. and Achutaramarao, M. 1977. Studies in comparative virulence of samples
of red rot fungus (light race) collected from Co 419 and Co 997. In Proc 6th Joint
Conv.  of Sugarcane Tech.  Assoc., Kanpur  pp. 97-101.
Sarma, M. N., Ramakrishnarao, S. V., Ramapandu, S. and Subbayya, J. 1984. Survival of
red rot pathogen on infected debris in soil. Maharashtra Sugar, 10(1): 101-103.
Sarma, M. N., Satyanarayana, Y., Ramarao, M. A. and Ramakrishnarao, S. V. 1980.
Soil infection and the spread of red rot disease of sugarcane. Maharashtra Sugar,
5(10): 13-15.
Satyanarayana, Y. and Achutaramarao, M. 1982. Studies on the reaction of different cane
varieties to light race isolates of red rot fungus from Co 419 and Co 997 individually
and in combination. Maharashtra Sugar, 7(10): 27-30.
Satyanarayana, Y. and Achutaramarao, M. 1984. Evidence on the existence of two
physiologically different strains in the light race isolates of Physalospora tucumanensis
Speg. in Andhra Pradesh, India. Int. Jour. Sugarcane, 3:6.
Satyanarayana, Y. and Achutaramarao, M. 1995. Extent of survival of red rot pathogen in
soil and affected cane material. In Proc. National seminar on sugarcane production
constraints and strategies for research and management of red rot. I.I.S.R., Lucknow.
pp. 313-322.
Satyanarayana, Y. and Achutaramarao, M. 1995. Investigations on race flora of Colletotrichum
falcatum, incitant of red rot disease of sugarcane. In Proc. National seminar on
Sugarcane production constraints and strategies for research and management of red
rot. I.I.S.R., Lucknow. pp. 285-293.
Satyanarayana, Y. and Satyanarayana, B. 1976. Variation in the light race isolates of red
rot fungus in Andhra Pradesh. Co-operative Sugar, 7(8): 389-392.
Satyanarayana, Y., Achutaramarao, M. and Ramapandu, S. 1984. Influence of conidial
concentration of Physalospora tucumanensis  Speg. in the inoculum on the reaction of
sugarcane varieties. Int. J. Sugarcane, 2: 6.
Satyavir 2003. Red rot of sugarcane - Current Scenario. Indian Phytopathology,
53: 245-254.
References 127
Satyavir 2005. Diseases of sugarcane: current status and management strategies. Plant
Disease Research,  21: 1-10.
Satyavir, Beniwal, M.S., Virk, K.S. and Maheshwari, S.K. 1984. Breakdown of red rot
resistance in sugarcane cultivar Co 1148. Indian Phytopathology, 37: 407.
Satyavir, Virk, K. S. and Kumar, A. 1994. Red rot management through host resistance –
a sound option. In Current Trends in Sugarcane Pathology.  Rao, G. P., Gillaspie, Jr,
Upadhyaya, P. P., Bergamin, A., Agnihotri, V. P. and Chen, C. T. (Eds.). International
Books and Periodical Supply Service, Pitampura, Delhi. pp. 377-391.
Satyavir, Virk, K. S. and Kumar, A. 1995. Resistance of Sugarcane genotypes against red
rot pathogen. In Proc. National seminar on sugarcane production constraints and
strategies for research and management of red rot. I.I.S.R., Lucknow. pp. 244-258.
Sharma, N., Kumar, A., Raj, K., Satyavir. 2001. Evaluation of systemic fungicides against
red rot of sugarcane (Colletotrichum falcatum). Annals of Applied Biology, 141: 14-15.
Sharma, S. L. and Jha, H. C. 1957. Longevity of red rot fungus (Glomerella tucumanensis
Arx and Muller) in sugarcane debris in soil.  Indian J. Sugarcane Research and
Development, 2: 50-51.
Sharma, S. L., Singh, R. K. and Jha, H. C. 1957. Possible role of fungicides in the control
of red rot fungus (Colletotrichum falcatum = Glomerella tucumanensis Arx and Muller).
Indian J. Sugarcane Research and Development, 2: 174-175.
Singh, G. P. and Hussain, A. 1963. Role of enzymes in red rot disease of sugarcane. Curr.
Sci., 32: 81-83.
Singh, G. P. and Hussain, A. 1964. Relation of hydrolytic enzyme activity with the virulence
of strain of Colletotrichum falcatum. Phytopathology, 54: 1100-1101.
Singh, G. R. 1966. Red rot field infection of sugarcane leaves in Louisiana. Indian Sugar,
15(11): 735-737.
Singh, G. R. 1967. Spread of red rot in the leaves of sugarcane plant. Indian Phytopathology,
20: 220-225.
Singh, G. R. 1969. Red rot infection and its development in young sugarcane plants. Proc.
ISSCT., 13: 1241-1250.
Singh, H. N., Gupta, S C., Singh, S. B. and Singh, M. P. 1978. Improvement of the
technique for screening against red rot of seedling stage. Sugarcane Pathol. Newsl.,
21: 29-31.
Singh, K. 1973. Hot air therapy against red rot of sugarcane. Plant Dis. Reptr., 57: 220-222.
Singh, K. 1983. Seed-piece transmissible diseases of sugarcane and three-tier seed
programme. In Recent Advances in Plant Pathology. A. Husain, K. Singh, B.P. Singh
and V.P. Agnihotri. (Eds.). Print House (India), Lucknow, pp. 331-343.
Singh, K. and Alexander, K. C. 1970. Laminar infection of sugarcane leaves by red rot
(Physalospora tucumanensis) organism in nature. Indian Phytopathology, 23: 114-115.
References128
Singh, K. and Budhraja, T. R. 1964. Methods of inoculating sugarcane for red rot. Plant
Disease Reptr., 48: 991-993.
Singh, K. and Singh, R. P. 1989. Red rot. In Diseases of Sugarcane-Major Diseases. C.
Ricaud, B. T. Egan, A. G. Gillaspie(Jr.) and C. G. Hughes. (Eds.). Elsevier,
Amsterdam. pp. 169-188.
Singh, K., Bhansali, R. R., Singh, N. Ghosh, A. K. and Srivastava, A. K. 1983. Infection
sites and movement of Colletotrichum falcatum in sugarcane setts and settlings. Jour.
Nuclear Agric. and Biol.,  12: 62-64.
Singh, K., Budhraja, T. R. and Agnihotri, V. P. 1977. Survival of Colletotrichum falcatum
in soil, its portals of entry and role of inoculum density in causing infection. Int.
Sugarcane. Jour., 1977(9): 43-44.
Singh, K., Misra, S. R., Shukla, U. S. and Singh, R. P. 1980. Moist hot air therapy of
sugarcane: Control of sett-borne infections of GSD, smut and red rot. Sugar J.,
43: 26-28.
Singh, K., Singh, R. P. and Agnihotri, V. P. 1976. Phenolics in relation to sugarcane
resistance against red rot disease. Sugarcane Pathol. Newsl., 15/16: 37-41.
Singh, K., Singh, R. P. and Lal, S. 1988. Effect of ambient temperature on red rot development
in sugarcane. Indian Phytopathology, 41: 86-91.
Singh, M. P., Upadhyay, U. C., Verma, K. P. and Singh, H. N. 1984. Pathogenic variability
in red rot pathogen in U. P. Indian Sugar, 18: 537-540.
Singh, M. Rao, G. P., Singh, S. P. Verma, K. P., Singh, H. N. and Singh, S. B. 1995.
Effect of gamma-irradiation on cultural and pathogenic variability of Colletotrichum
falcatum. In Proc. National seminar on sugarcane production constraints and strategies
for research and management of red rot. I.I.S.R., Lucknow. pp. 364-368.
Singh, N. 1985. Effect of amendment on red rot development in sugarcane. Indian
Phytopathology, 38: 382-384.
Singh, N. 1988. Spread of red rot pathogen and infection from primary focus in standing
sugarcane crop. Indian Phytopathology, 41: 253-255.
Singh, N. and Agnihotri, V. P. 1995. Some soil aspects of epidemiology of red rot disease.
In Proc. National seminar on sugarcane production constraints and strateg ies for
research and management of red rot. I.I.S.R., Lucknow. pp. 295-312.
Singh, N. and Singh, K. 1981. Appressoria formation by Colletotrichum falcatum in affected
buds of sugarcane. Indian Phytopathology, 34: 534-535.
Singh, N. and Singh, K. 1982. Formation of resting structures by Colletotrichum falcatum
Went in soil. Curr. Sci., 51: 102-104.
Singh, O and Waraitch, K.S. 1981. Effect of wilt and red rot induced stress on quality
deterioration of sugarcane. Sugarcane Pathol. Newsl., 27 : 25-30.
References 129
Singh, P. 1964. Studies on the enzyme sucrase as secreted by the conidia of Colletotrichum
falcatum Went. Phytopath. Z., 54:79-86.
Singh, P. 1965. Studies on the stimulation of conidial germination in Colletotrichum falcatum.
Indian Phytopathology, 18: 291-302.
Singh, P. 1966a. Studies on the effect of soil extract on conidial germination in Colletotrichum
falcatum Went. Mycopath et Mycol. Appl., 28: 301-304.
Singh, P. 1966b. Studies on the effect of certain nutrients on the conidial germination in
Colletotrichum falcatum. Indian Phytopathology, 19: 30-37.
Singh, P. 1968. Influence of host-exudates on conidial germination in Colletotrichum falcatum.
Acta Phytopath. Acad. Sci. (Hung.), 3: 13-22.
Singh, P. 1973. Conidial germination of Colletotrichum falcatum a study of physiological
factors and standardisation of germination technique. Acta Phytopath. Acad. Sci.
(Hung.), 8: 19-41.
Singh, P. 1973. Effect of light, temperature and substrate during spore germination on the
germinability of conidia of Colletotrichum falcatum. Physiol. Plant, 29: 194-197.
Singh, P. and Chona, B. L. 1964. Nuclear condition of conidia in Colletotrichum falcatum
Went. Indian J. Expt. Biol., 2: 241-243.
Singh, P. and Payak, M. M. 1968. Observations on karyology, hyphal fusions and production
of a new isolate in Colletotrichum falcatum. Acta Phytopath. Acad. Sci. (Hung.),
3: 143-155.
Singh, R. P. and Agnihotri, V. P. 1987. Thermotherapy of sugarcane for disease control. In
Review of Tropical Plant Pathology. S. P. Raychaudhuri and J.P. Verma. (Eds.).
Today and Tomorrow’s Printers & Pub. New Delhi, vol. IV. pp. 305-329.
Singh, R. P. and Lal, S. 1996. Air-borne propagules of Colletotrichum falcatum and their
role in the epidemiology of sugarcane red rot. Indian Phytopathology, 49: 89-91.
Sivanesan, A. and Waller, J. M. 1986. Sugarcane Diseases. Phytopath. Paper No. 29. CMI,
Kew, England. 88 pp.
Spegazzini, C. 1896. Hongos de la cana de azucar. Rev. Fac. Agron. y Vet., 2: 227-258.
Sreeramulu, T. 1973. Aeromycological observations and their implications in epidemilogy
of some diseases of sugarcane. INSA Bulletin No. 46, 1973. pp. 506-570.
Sreeramulu, T. and Vittal, B. P. R. 1970. Incidence and spread of red rot lesions on mid-rib
of sugarcane leaves. Plant Dis. Reptr., 54: 226-231.
Srinivasan, K. V. 1961. Importance of lesion width in assessing resistance of sugarcane
varieties to red rot (Glomerella tucumanensis (Speg.) Arx and Muller). J.  Indian Bot.
Soc., 40: 641-644.
Srinivasan, K. V. 1962a. A technique for the elimination of red rot susceptible sugarcane
seedlings at an early stage. Curr. Sci., 31: 112-113.
References130
Srinivasan, K. V. 1962b. Some observations on variation in red rot pathogen Glomerella
tucumanensis (Speg.) Arx and Muller. Proc. ISSCT, 11: 795-802.
Srinivasan, K. V. 1963. Sporulation of the sugarcane red rot pathogen on the juice of
varieties of varying resistance. Science & Culture, 29: 87-88.
Srinivasan, K. V. 1965. Towards the ideal of red rot resistance - ends and means. Proc.
ISSCT., 12: 1108-1117.
Srinivasan, K. V. 1969. Physiology of disease resistance in sugarcane with particular reference
to red rot. Proc. Indian Acad. Sci. 59(B): 120-132.
Srinivasan, K. V. 1971. Hot water treatment for disease control. Sugarcane Pathol. Newsl.,
6: 46.
Srinivasan, K. V. and Alexander, K. C. 1964. A study of mode of nodal infection and
occurrence of dormant infections of red rot. In Proc. All India Conf. Sugarcane Research
and Development Workers, 5: 676-684.
Srinivasan, K. V. and Alexander, K. C. 1971. Sources of resistance in the different species
of Saccharum to red rot and smut diseases of sugarcane. Sugarcane Pathol. Newsl.,
6: 6-7.
Srinivasan, K. V. and Bhat, N. R. 1961. Red rot of sugarcane — Criteria for grading
resistance. J. Indian Bot. Society, 40: 566-577.
Srinivasan, K. V. and Chenulu, V. V. 1956. Preliminary study of the reaction of Saccharum
spontaneum variants to red rot, smut, rust and mosaic. Proc. ISSCT, 9: 1097-1107.
Srinivasan, K. V. and Vijayalakshmi, U. 1960. Note on a synergistic association between
Glomerella tucumanensis and a strain of Fusarium moniliforme. In Proc. All-India
Conf. Sugarcane Res. & Development Workers, Waltair-1960, 4:619-622.
Srinivasan, K. V. and Vijayalakshmi, U. 1960. Thiamine and biotin requirements of two
strains of Glomerella tucumanensis (Speg.) Arx and Muller. Curr. Sci. 29: 103-104.
Srivastava, H.M. 1993. Sugarcane breeding and varietal improvement in subtripical India.
In 40 years of sugarcane research and development in sub-tropical India. G.B., Singh
and O.K., Sinha. (Eds.) pp. 37-75. IISR, Lucknow.
Steib, R.J. and Chilton, S.J.P. 1951. Infection of sugar cane stalks by the red rot fungus
Physalospora tucumanensis Speg. Phytopathology, 41 : 522-528.
Stevenson, G. C. 1965. Genetics and Breeding of Sugar Cane. Longmans, Green and Co.
Ltd., London. 284 pp.
Sundar, A.R., Velazhahan, R., Viswanathan, R., Padmanaban P. and Vidhyasekaran,
P. 2001. Induction of systemic resistance to Colletotrichum falcatum in sugarcane by
a synthetic signal molecule, acibenzolar-S-methyl (CGA 245704). Phytoparasitica,
29: 231-242.
References 131
Sutton, B.C. 1966. Development of fructifications in Colletotrichum graminicola (Ces.)
Wils. and related species. Cand. J. Bot., 44 : 887-897.
Sutton, B.C. 1968. The appressoria of Colletotrichum graminicola and C. falcatum. Cand.
J. Bot., 46 : 873-876.
Sutton, B. C. 1980. The Coelomycetes. CMI, Kew, England. 696 pp.
Tilak, K. V. B. R., 1968. Studies on the sporulation of Colletotrichum falcatum Went on
sugarcane juice of resistant and susceptible varieties. Phytopath. Z.,  61: 286-291.
Van Dillewijn, C. 1952. Botany of Sugar Cane. Waltham Mass, U.S.A., 371 pp.
Vanderplank, J. E. 1963. Plant Diseases : Epidemics and Control. Academic Press, New
York. 349 pp.
Vanderplank, J. E. 1984. Disease Resistance in Plants. (2nd Ed.). Academic Press, Orlando,
Florida. 194 pp.
Varma, S. C. and Mital, S. P. 1949. The structure of xylem vessels in the nodal region of
sugarcane in relation to its resistance to red rot (Colletotrichum falcatum, Went).
Indian J. agric. Sci.,19,Part III:383-387.
Vasudeva, R. S. and Chona, B. L. 1951. Fighting red rot epidemic. Indian Farming 1(6): 23-
26. (New Series).
Vasudeva, R. S., Bajaj, B. S. and Khosla, N. 1961. Spore germination in Colletotrichum
falcatum Went. Indian Phytopathology, 15: 190-201.
Vasudeva, R. S., Iyenger, M. R. S., Bajaj, B. S. and Chatrath, M. S. 1958. Mutation in
Colletotrichum falcatum Went., the causal organism of red rot of sugarcane. I. Induced
by -radiation. Indian Phytopathology, 11: 91-95.
Verma, A. K., Jaiswal, S. P., Bajaj, K. L. and Bhatia, I. S. 1971. A study of polyphenols in
relation to red rot disease present in the stem of sugarcane varieties. Sugar y Azucar,
66: 11-13.
Virk, K. S. 1985. Hypodermic needle method of testing resistance of sugarcane red rot.
Indian Phytopathology, 38:554-555.
Virk, K. S., Satyavir and Chaudhary, B. S. 1985. A source of red rot resistance in sugarcane.
Indian Phytopathology, 38: 551-552.
Viswanathan, R. and Samiyappan, R. 2001. Role of chitinases in Pseudomonas spp. induced
systemic resistance against Colletotrichum falcatum in sugarcane. Indian Phytopathology,
54: 418-423.
Viswanathan, R. and Samiyappan, R.2002. Induced systemic resistance by fluorescent
pseudomonads against red rot disease of sugarcane caused by Colletotrichum falcatum.
Crop Protection, 21: 1-10.
References132
Viswanathan, R., Padmanaban, P. and Mohanraj, D. 1998. Comparison of three testing
methods for the evaluation of red rot (Colletotrichum falcatum Went) in sugarcane.
Indian J. agric. Sci., 68:226-230
von Arx, J. A. 1957. Die Arten der Gattung Colletotrichum Corda. Phytopath. Z., 29:
413-468.
von Arx, J. A. and Muller, E. 1954. Die Gattungen der Amerosporen Pyrenomyceten.
Beitrage zur Kryptogamenflora der Schweiz., 11 (1): 5-434.
Watt, G. 1893. A dictionary of economic products of India. Vol. VI, Part II. (Sabadilla to
Silica). Reprinted by Cosmo Publications, Delhi-6. 687 pp.
Went, F. A. F. C. 1893. Het Rood Snot. Arch. Java Suikeridustrie, 1: 265-282.
Wilson, K. I. and Srivastava, D. N. 1970. Phenolic content of sugarcane in relation to red
rot disease. Experientia, 26: 1074.
Yadav, D.V. and Duttamajumder, 2007. IISR Perspective Plan : Vision-2025. IISR,
Lucknow, 68 pp.
Zin, Z., Hoy, J. W., Milligan, S. B. 1996. Evaluation and heritability of resistance to
sugarcane red rot. Phytopathology, 86: 662-667.
Plate 1 : Life cycle of sugarcane 
(a) Flowering/arrowing is sugarcane (b) An arrow (c) Spikelet (d) Feathery stigma 
(e) True seed (defuzzed, magnified) (f) Fluff (g) Seedling emergence (h) Young 
seedlings (i) Seedlings ready for transplanting (j)&(k) Cane formation from single 
seedling.
a
d
b
f
j
h
e
i
c
g
k
Plate 2 : The damage potential of C. falcatum
Red rot decimated the susceptible variety completely (in August)
Plate 3 : Mortality of young shoot due to red rot
(a) Death of emerging shoot (germination failure) (b) Death of young shoot (c) Tiller 
mortality (d) Early spindle infection (at ratoon initiation).
a
c
b
d
Plate 4 : Spindle infection or red rot
(a)&(b) Appearance of water-soaked spots on the abaxial side (back side) of the mid-rib. 
Infection progresses from the base of the unfolding leaf. (c)&(d) Quick and heavy 
sporulation appears on the spots turning them black. Sporulation also appears on the 
adaxial side of mid-rib.
a
c
b
d
Plate 5 : Spindle infection (contd.)
(a) On the unfolded leaf, eye-shaped spots surrounded by yellow halo develop 
(b) Sporulation starts at the centre of the spot (c) Occasional damage of leaf sheath (on 
the way of lamina) (d) A photomicrograph showing abundance formation of setae.
a
c
b
d
Plate 6 : Development of appressoria on leaf surface of sugarcane
(a), (b) and (c) Appressoria/chlamydospore developed on leaf (d) Development of 
appressed acervulus in the leaf fold.
a
c
b
d
Plate 7 : Yellowing of crown leaves (first symptom in mature cane) 
(a) Yellowing more visible in the prominent leaves  (b) Entire crown turns yellow as the disease progresses.
a b
Plate 8 : Symptoms at advanced stage of red rot 
(a) & (b) Yellowing of top and death of plant.
a b
Plate 9 : External symptoms on cane (Discolouration of nodal & internodal tissues)
(a) Discolouration of internode (epidermis) (b) Internal appearance of cane after removal of epidermis (c) Damage of 
node and development of depressions in the internode (in advanced stage).
a b c
Plate 10 : Internal symptoms of red rot 
(a) Development of white-spots (b)&(c) Damage of nodes and rotting of internode 
(d) Development of internal cavity.
a
c
b
d
a
c
b
d
Plate 11 : Internal symptoms (contd.)
(a) Delimited white-spots (b)&(c) Cavity formation, fungal growth and sporulation in 
the cavity (d) Internal symptom of wilt (node unaffected, dry & larger cavity)
Plate 12 : Nodal rotting and sporulation 
(a)&(b) C. falcatum preferentially damages the nodal tissues leaving vascular bundles 
unaffected (c) Sporulation on damaged cane (d) Acervulus formation (e) Sporulation on 
sterilized stalk pieces (more spores, less setae).
a
c
b
d e
Plate 13 : Sporulation on the stalk 
(a) Sporulation on diseased cane (b)&(c) Acervuli formation; fungus coming 
out breaking the cuticular/epidermal wax (d)&(c) close-up of the acervulus (f), (g) & (h) 
Damage of root band. Root primordia completely transformed into acervulus.
(drying) 
a
d
f
b
e
c
g h
Plate 14 : Mid-rib infection of red rot
(a)&(b) Development of eye/spindle shaped spot on the mid-rib; initially blood red, 
later on centre turns ashy (c)&(d) Sporulation (development acervuli, setae & conidia) 
on the ashy area.
a
c
b
d
a b 2 2
4 4
1 1
3
3
Plate 15 : Mid-rib infection covering entire leaf 
(a) Large size mid-rib infection (b) Mid-rib infection covering entire length of leaf. 
Yellowing and drying starts tip downwards.
Plate 16 : Development of acervulus in C. falcatum 
(a) Acervulus formation on the surface of leaf (b)&(c) Conidiophore bearing conidium 
coming out through stomata (d) Formation of acervuli on  the stomata.
d
c
b
a
Plate 17 : Proliferation of hyphae in stalk (white spot) 
(a), (b),  (c) & (d) Stalk cell is filled with C. falcatum hyphae.
a
c
b
d
Plate 18 : Growth of C. falcatum on oatmeal agar (OMA) 
(a) Culture on OMA - Cf 01 (b) Close-up of sporemass (c) & (d) Development of greyish 
white hyphal growth and sparse sporulation in Cf 01.
a
c
b
d
Plate 19 : Conidial sbape and size 
(a) Typical conidia (b) & (e) Variation in conidial shape (a), (c) (d) Note the formation of 
septa in conidia even in non-germinating conidia.
a
c
b
d e
Plate 20 : Conidial development and nuclear condition 
(a) & (b) Development of conidia on conidiophore (c) Single central nucleus in conidia 
(d) Single central nucleus in ascospore (c) & (e) Note the granular content of conidia.
a
e
b
c d
Plate 21 : Nuclear condition in conidia (variation) 
(a) & (b) Single central nucleus (c) Conidia possessing two nuclei, note the shape of 
conidia (acridine orange fluorescence).
a
b
c
Plate 22 : Germination of conidia 
(a), (b), (c) & (d) Subpolar germination, formation of septum in conidium, immediate 
formation of appressoria (a), (e), (f) & (g) Bipolar germination (h) Multipolar 
germination.
a
c
b
e
f
hg
d
Plate 23 : Germination of conidia (contd.)
(a) Bipolar germination without immediate formation of appressoria (b), (d) Multipolar 
germination (c), (f) Appressoria have no resting period, immediate development of 
infection peg (b), (c), (d), (e) & (g) Appressoria may be terminal or intercalary 
(h) Appressorium forming appressorium instead of infection peg (i) Multiple 
appressoria formation.
a
c
b
e
f
h
i
g
d
Plate 24 : Appressoria/chlamydospore of C. falcatum 
(a) Appressoria formation at the bottom of media where it touches the glass (petridish) 
(b), (c) & (d) Appressoria/chlamydospore formation in the leaf fold (spindle infection).
a
c
b
d
Plate 25 : Transformation of conidia into secondary conidia bearing structures 
(a) Central portion of conidium giving rise to daughter conidium (b), (c), (d) & (e) 
Formation of daughter conidia (f) conidia formation after conidial fusion (g) Large sized 
conidium (aberrant).
a
g
f
e
c
b
d
Plate 26 : Development of acervulus in culture
(a) & (b) Initial phase of acervulus development after germination of conidium (note 
appressoria & setae) (c) Acervulus development on media (note the transformation of 
hyphae into conidiophores and setae) (d) An acervulus.
a
c
b
d
Plate 27 : Transformation of setae to perform different functions 
(a), (b) & (c) Formation of conidia at the hyaline tip (single & branched)
(d), (e) Changed to hyphal structures.
a
d
b c
e
Plate 28 : Synnamatous development of setae
a
cb
Plate 29 : Sexual stage of C. falcatum 
(a) & (b) Perithecia on dry/dead cane leaves (black dots) (c) Perithecia (round to oval 
appearance) develop in between vascular bundles (magnified abaxial view) (d) Ostiole 
showing exit of ascospores from perithecium.
a
c
b
d
Plate 30 : Perithecium, asci and ascospores (Glomerella tucumanensis)
(a) Perithecium with ostiole (b) Content of perithecium-asci and paraphyses (c) 8-spored 
ascus, ascospores arranged in a biseriate pattern.
a
c
b
Plate 31 : Ascospore-shape, size, nuclear condition and germination 
(a), (b), (c) and (d) Single celled ascospores, single central nucleus (e), (f) & (g) 
Germination subpolar - with or without septa formation, development of appressoria (h) 
Appressorium has no resting period; immediately infection peg develops.
a b c
d
e f
g h
Plate 32 : Hyphal fusion and nuclear migration 
(a) & (b) Fusion of hyphae of two conidia at germination (c) Fusion of hyphae of same 
conidia (d), (e) & (f) Multiple hyphal fusion (g) Nuclear migration from hyphae to 
conidium (h) Nuclear migration between hyphae.
a b
c d
e f
g h
Plate 33 : Conidial fusion in C. falcatum
(a) Multiple fusion among conidia (b) Fusion of conidia and transformation into dark 
coloured thick walled type (c) Multiple fusion (d) A fusion aggregate of conidia.
a
c
b
d
Plate 34 : Nuclear condition and conidial development 
(a) Formation of daughter conidia from the fusion aggregate (b) & (c) Nuclear migration 
in conidial fusion (d) Division of nucleus in conidium (e) Multiple nuclei formation in 
conidium.
a
cb
d e
Plate 35 : Variation in conidial fusion 
(a) & (b) Between conidia (c) & (e) Between conidium and hypha (d) Between conidium 
and appressorium (Note the change in colour of conidia)
a
cb
d e
Plate 36 : Nodal morphology of cane 
(a) Typical node - wax ring, leaf scar, root band, bud, growth ring (c) Sunken root 
primordia (root eye) (d) & (e) Protruding root primordia (f) Bud groove. Note different 
bud morphologies - shape, size of bud, and bud scales.
a
d
b
e
c
f
Plate 37 : Development of roots in sugarcane
(a) & (b) Aerial roots, on mature standing cane (c) Sett roots, at germination (d) Damage 
of sett roots due to pathogen attack (germination failure).
a b
c d
Plate 38 : Parafilm technique of inoculation
(a) Wrapping of parafilm with inoculum in cotton swab (b) & (c) Development of 
disease (note the discolouration of rind) (d) Yellowing of crown (f) Dying/death of 
plants.
a b
d e
c
Plate 39 : Inoculators and plug method
(a)  Piercer  (b) IISR inoculator (c) Portable drill (d) Hole in the internode (e) Hole with 
plug (f) Hole and plug covered with modelling clay.
a b c
d e f
